Title: Evolution as fitness landscape navigation: Concepts, Measures, and Emerging Questions

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.17036v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 00:49:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
# Evolution as fitness landscape navigation: Concepts, Measures, and Emerging Questions 

# Malvika Srivastava 1, Claudia Bank 2,3 , Joachim Krug 4, and Suman G. Das ∗2,3 1Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland 

> 2

# Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland 

> 3

# Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland 

> 4

# Institute for Biological Physics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany April 21, 2026 

Abstract 

Fitness landscapes are mappings between genotypes, phenotypes, and fitness that shape evolution. In recent years, empirical work and theoretical models have greatly advanced our understanding of how pop-ulations navigate rugged fitness landscapes. Here, we provide a timely review of this field. Its rapidly growing literature employs a wide range of terms, which are sometimes used ambiguously or inconsistently. We therefore begin by defining the major concepts and the field’s vocabulary, highlighting our own terminol-ogy choices wherever needed. We then review key results on the relationships between epistasis, ruggedness, accessibility, and navigability for genotype-fitness maps, highlighting several complex and sometimes coun-terintuitive connections that have emerged. Further, we review how the conserved structural properties of the underlying genotype-phenotype map – that leads to the formation of large connected neutral networks of genotypes – influence dynamics on fitness landscapes. We then compare the two levels to study land-scape navigation – the level of the genotype-phenotype maps and the level of genotype-fitness maps. Our review leads us to propose a new measure of navigability, based on evolutionary outcomes, that is broadly applicable and overcomes limitations of existing measures. Finally, we review the smaller body of work that relaxes the common assumption of fitness-monotonic paths on static landscapes, and discuss how this can fundamentally change the nature of fitness landscape navigation. Throughout the review, we identify directions for future work to fill existing gaps and to synthesize the disparate strands of research within the field. 

# 1 Introduction 

The concept of fitness landscapes as maps from geno-types to fitness was introduced by Wright (1932), and was accompanied by a classic metaphorical image that depicted a rugged terrain with multiple peaks and valleys. For a long time, the fitness landscape served primarily as a metaphor for understanding evolution as a selection-driven process of ’climbing’ fitness peaks (Svensson and Calsbeek, 2012). Re-cent decades, however, have experienced a renewed interest in fitness landscapes driven by empirical re-sults emphasizing the ubiquity of epistasis (reviewed in Phillips, 2008; De Visser and Krug, 2014; Domingo et al., 2019), and by the technological possibility to measure empirical fitness landscapes (reviewed in De Visser and Krug, 2014 and Bank, 2022). In addi-1

> arXiv:2604.17036v1 [q-bio.PE] 18 Apr 2026 Peak
> Peak
> Peak
> AB
> AD
> CB
> CD
> Fitness
> NCred
> Genotypes
> Genotypes
> NCyellow
> NCgreen

Figure 1: Schematic diagram of a genotype-phenotype-fitness landscape. Circles represent genotypes, and edges connect genotypes to their 

genotypic neighbors . The color of each genotype rep-resents its phenotype; together, the circles and their colors define a genotype–phenotype (GP) map . The vertical elevation of each genotype corresponds to its fitness, and these elevations collectively define the genotype–fitness map, or the fitness landscape . The genotypes AB , AD , CD , and CB exhibit sign epis-tasis , since the mutation from B → D is beneficial on the A background but deleterious on the C back-ground. Coloured arrows indicate accessible paths :they point in the direction of increasing fitness, and their color denotes the peak phenotype at which the walk terminates. The adaptive basin of each peak (here blue and yellow) is highlighted by the border color of the genotypes belonging to that basin. Neu-tral mutations are shown as dark gray undirected edges. The red genotype CD has a genotypic ro-bustness of 12 . In a greedy walk, a population at this genotype proceeds to the yellow peak genotype AD .However, in a random adaptive walk , the population may instead move to the green genotype CB and ul-timately reach the blue peak. The genotypes at the vertices of the red square form the largest neutral component (NC) , of size 4. The phenotypic evolvabil-ity of the NC corresponding to the red phenotype, 

ϵred , is 3, since three distinct phenotypes (blue, green, and yellow) can be reached by single mutational steps from the red NC. Similarly, ϵgreen = 3, ϵyellow = 2, and ϵblue = 2. tion, an influx of ideas from other disciplines, such as statistical physics (Stein, 1992; Stadler, 2002), com-puter science (Richter and Engelbrecht, 2014), and complex systems (Kauffman, 1995; Stadler, 2007), has introduced new theoretical models and methods for quantifying and predicting epistatic effects. Recent years have seen an especially steep increase in studies on landscape navigation, which aim to un-derstand how a population subject to the forces of evolution finds its way to high-fitness regions of com-plex fitness landscapes. A key term in this context is the “navigability” of a fitness landscape. To our knowledge, the term navigability – now common in the literature – was introduced into modern fitness landscape theory less than a decade ago by Aguilar-Rodr´ ıguez et al. (2017). The authors defined land-scape navigability as “the ability to access a global peak via an evolutionary exploration involving ran-dom mutation and natural selection”. This work was soon followed by a study of genotype-phenotype (GP) maps (Manrubia and Cuesta, 2017) where navigabil-ity was defined as “the ease with which alternative phenotypes are reached”. While the term is rela-tively new, the topic itself is much older, and some of the key questions go back all the way to Wright (1932). What has changed rapidly in recent years is the availability of increasingly large fitness landscape datasets and high computational power, facilitating empirically-informed answers to questions that were once posed in the abstract. Thus, the navigation of fitness landscapes is no longer just a metaphor for evolution. We here take the opportunity to review this grow-ing field. We restrict ourselves to theory that con-ceptualizes fitness landscapes as mappings from a discrete genotype space (i.e., a hypercube or Ham-ming space ) to phenotypes or fitness, and that aims to quantify the navigation process across the whole landscape in the long term. This explicitly ex-cludes theoretical approaches from quantitative ge-netics (Walsh and Lynch, 2018) and adaptive dynam-ics (Mullon, 2020), which have been used to address related questions. As we highlight throughout the paper, the “shape” of such mappings from genotype to phenotype or fitness, which ultimately determines the ruggedness and navigability of the fitness land-2scape, is crucially determined both by the topology of the genotype space, i.e., the connectedness and size of the Hamming space, and the topography of the mapping, i.e. the values to which each genotype is mapped. Also within our restricted selection of literature and due to the interdisciplinarity of this research area, we perceive a large variation in approaches and viewpoints to the study of fitness landscapes, some of which we would like to highlight here. Studies of probabilistic fitness landscapes (section 3A, B) often focus on local or global statistics of the topography of the fitness landscape and how these may yield analyt-ical predictions regarding navigation of a given land-scape. This focus could stem from the field’s vicinity to statistical physics, from which methods to char-acterize fitness graphs can be adopted (Schmiegelt and Krug, 2023; Hwang et al., 2018). The study of the speed of adaptation on probabilistic fitness land-scapes (section 3A) has been taken up by computer scientists interested in search problems on complex graphs (Kaznatcheev, 2019). In comparison, stud-ies of genotype-phenotype maps (section 3C, D) are often directly motivated by complex empirical data or numerical models of RNA folding, resulting in a focus on simulations and on studying specific tra-jectories towards a “target phenotype”. Here, op-timization is invoked not necessarily with regard to fitness but with regard to keeping options open while remaining “stable” (Manrubia et al., 2021a; Green-bury et al., 2022). Further, the possibility for neu-tral plateaus and genotypic redundancy generates fitness landscapes with varying topologies. Finally, the original questions posed by Wright (1932) came from evolutionary biology, a field in which the rela-tive importance of epistatic and beneficial selection has been continually debated. Notably, Wright ar-gued in his seminal paper that because of his pro-posed ruggedness of the fitness landscape, other evo-lutionary forces such as migration or genetic drift are crucial to carry populations across fitness peaks. Therefore, we discuss in section 4 how shifting the fo-cus away from (strong) selection and weak mutation as the main evolutionary processes during landscape navigation may take the field forward. Given its interdisciplinarity and rapid growth, terms related to the study of fitness landscapes are sometimes used in an inconsistent or ambiguous man-ner. As noted before, the term “navigability” itself was introduced differently by two different studies. To address this challenge, we begin our review with a glossary of terms. Importantly, throughout the pa-per, we distinguish between the terms “navigability” and “navigation”. We use the latter term to refer to the process of moving across a landscape under the influence of evolutionary forces. In contrast, the term “navigability” refers to some feature of the fit-ness landscape that describes the “ease” of evolution-ary movement across it. Similar to the term “rugged-ness”, “navigability” does not have a consensus quan-titative definition. Ultimately, our review of the lit-erature leads us to propose a new measure, which we term “navigational ruggedness”, and which we argue could capture important features related to the nav-igation of fitness landscapes. 

# 2 Glossary 

This section contains an alphabetical glossary of terms defining fundamental concepts and measures used in the field and featured in this review. Alter-native or uncommon usages of terms in the literature are noted where this helps avoid confusion. 

Accessible path A path is a succession of single-mutation steps that connect two genotypes. A (selec-tively) accessible path is a path for which every step is fitness-increasing (Weinreich et al., 2005; Franke et al., 2011). Accessible paths are indicated by thick blue and yellow arrows in Figure 1. In the context of navigation of GP maps, the definition includes paths with neutral steps (shown with gray lines). 

Accessibility A genotype g′ is accessible from geno-type g when there exists an accessible path from g

to g′. The path is direct if the distance to the tar-get genotype g′ decreases in each step and indirect 

otherwise. 

Adaptive basin The adaptive basin of a peak is the set of all genotypes from which accessible paths to this peak exist. Adaptive basins of the peaks are 3highlighted with thick colored borders in Figure 1. An adaptive basin is sometimes called the basin of attraction . We do not use this term to avoid confusion with gradient basins. 

Adaptive walk An adaptive walk provides a de-scription of the evolutionary process in the limit of strong selection and weak mutation (SSWM regime, see Gillespie, 1984, Orr, 2002 and McCandlish and Stoltzfus, 2014). Formally, it is a Markov chain that traces an accessible path. In other words, at every step of the adaptive walk, the genotype is updated to a fitter neighboring genotype. In a random adap-tive walk, the new genotype is chosen uniformly at random from among all fitter genotypic neighbors (Kauffman and Levin, 1987). A greedy or gradient walk is a deterministic limiting case in which the new genotype is always the fittest neighboring genotype (Orr, 2003). 

Allele graph A graph showing all possible allelic states at each locus in a genotype with edges con-necting mutational neighbors (Schmiegelt and Krug, 2023). 

Alphabet cardinality The number of possible alle-les at each locus in a genotype; e.g., it is 4 (nu-cleotides) for DNA sequences and 20 (amino acids) for protein sequences. 

Epistasis The dependence of the fitness effect of a mutation on the genetic background in which it oc-curs (Phillips, 2008; Poelwijk et al., 2016; Domingo et al., 2019; Johnson et al., 2023). 

Evolvability of a genotype-phenotype (GP) map 

In the GP map literature, evolvability, as a measure of adaptive potential, has been defined at two different levels. At the genotypic level, (genotypic) evolvability is the number of different phenotypes that can be reached by mutational changes in a given genotype, whereas at the phenotypic level, (phenotypic) evolvability is the number of different phenotypes that can be reached by mutational changes in the genotypes that encode the given phenotype (see the caption of Figure 1 for the phenotypic evolvability of the different phenotypes) (Wagner, 2008). 

Fitness landscape In this review, a fitness land-scape is a map from a discrete genotype space to fitness (or to a phenotype used as a fitness proxy) (see Figure 1). 

Genotypic neighbor Sometimes simply called a‘neighbor’, a genotypic neighbor is a genotype at Hamming distance d = 1 from the reference geno-type, that is, it differs from the reference genotype at a single locus (see Figure 1). 

Genotype-phenotype (GP) map A map that specifies how genetic variation produces phenotypic variation (see Figure 1). A GP map can be defined at any biological scale, for instance, the mapping between RNA sequences and their secondary struc-ture or the mapping between a set of genes and the body-plan morphology they produce. 

Global epistasis A simplified form of epistasis where the dependence on genetic background reduces to a dependence on background fitness or some other low-dimensional phenotype (Diaz-Colunga et al., 2023). In the context of protein evolution this is also referred to as non-specific epistasis (Domingo et al., 2019). 

Gradient basin The gradient basin (or greedy basin) of a peak is the set of genotypes that can reach the peak through a greedy adaptive walk (Stadler and Stadler, 2010). Note that gradient basins of two peaks cannot overlap, whereas adaptive basins can. 

Hamming space A graph with nodes representing genotype sequences of length L with symbols drawn from an alphabet of a letters, and links representing point mutations (Stadler, 2002). The Hamming space of binary sequences ( a = 2) is the L-dimensional hy-percube. 

Navigability The navigability of a fitness landscape is the ease which which an evolving population can move across it. It does not have a consensus quanti-tative definition but is estimated in the literature in various ways (see subsequent sections). In the spe-cific context of the GP map literature, navigability of a genotype-phenotype-fitness map is defined as the average probability of existence of an accessible path 4between pairs of phenotypes, and evolutionary navi-gability is defined as the average probability that an accessible path is taken under evolutionary dynamics (Greenbury et al., 2022). 

Neutral Component (NC) A set of genotypic neighbors mapping to the same phenotype (see Fig-ure 1) (Greenbury et al., 2016). 

Random field models of fitness landscapes 

Probabilistic models that assign random variables to genotypes (Stadler and Happel, 1999). Ran-dom field models have become a standard tool for benchmarking empirical data and exploring generic properties of fitness landscapes. Examples include the following: (i) The House-of-Cards (HoC) or mutational land-scape model (Gillespie, 1984; Kauffman and Levin, 1987), where fitness is assigned randomly to each genotype. (ii) N K models (Kauffman and Weinberger, 1989; Hwang et al., 2018), where fitness is the sum of contributions of L loci, and the contribution of a locus depends both on its state and the state of 

K other loci with which it interacts. The value of the fitness contribution is chosen randomly. The N K model reduces to the HoC model for 

K = L − 1. (iii) Rough Mount Fuji (RMF) model (Aita et al., 2000; Szendro et al., 2013b; Neidhart et al., 2014), where the fitness of a genotype is the sum of additive contributions from each locus and a random term specific to the genotype. The strength of the random term can be tuned to modify the degree of epistasis in the landscape. (iv) Fisher’s geometric model (Blanquart et al., 2014; Hwang et al., 2017), where fitness is a single-peaked function in phenotype space, and mutational effects on phenotypes are additive. 

Robustness Genotypic robustness is the fraction of genotypic neighbors of a given genotype that have the same phenotype (see Figure 1). Phenotypic ro-bustness is the average mutational robustness of all genotypes that encode the given phenotype (Wagner, 2008). 

Reachability In this paper, we have defined the reachability of any genotype as the probability of reaching that genotype through an adaptive walk starting from specified initial conditions (Das et al., 2020). Unless otherwise mentioned, the initial geno-type is chosen randomly. 

Sign epistasis occurs when the sign of a mutation (beneficial or deleterious) depends on the genetic background (Weinreich et al., 2005). For example, in Figure 1 the mutation from B → D at the second locus is beneficial when the first locus carries an allele 

A, but is deleterious when the first locus carries an allele C. Reciprocal sign epistasis (RSE) occurs when mutations at two loci exhibit sign epistasis relative to each other (Poelwijk et al., 2007). 

# 3 Navigation of fitness land-scapes through accessible paths 

# 3A Epistasis and shape of fitness landscapes: overview 

Given a genotype space, the topography of a fitness landscape on it sets the background on which evolu-tionary processes unfold. The simplest topography is that of an additive landscape, where the effect of multiple mutations is the sum of the individual mu-tational effects. Such a landscape is single-peaked, and all steps toward the peak are fitness-increasing. 

Epistasis is defined as the interaction between mu-tational effects, and a landscape with such interac-tions is “rugged”. Several measures of ruggedness have been proposed and studied (Carneiro and Hartl, 2010; Szendro et al., 2013b; De Visser and Krug, 2014; Ferretti et al., 2016; Aguilar-Rodr´ ıguez et al., 2017). Early comparative studies of relatively small empirical landscapes found that different measures of ruggedness were generally consistent (Szendro et al., 2013b; De Visser and Krug, 2014). One of the most commonly used measures of ruggedness is the number of peaks in a landscape. It is naturally relevant in the study of fitness landscape 5navigation since questions often focus on the likeli-hood of reaching the global peak (or a comparatively high peak in the landscape). A key concern regarding the navigation process, already formulated by Wright (1932), is that a population may get trapped on local, low-fitness peaks when a landscape is highly rugged. The relationship between pairwise (i.e., local) epis-tasis and the number of peaks is complex. Classic work by Poelwijk et al. (2011) proved that the ex-istence of a reciprocal sign epistasis (RSE) motif is necessary for the existence of multiple peaks. The result was generalized by Saona et al. (2022) using discrete Morse theory to show that n peaks require the existence of at least n − 1 instances of RSE. The same result, but specifically for di-allelic loci, was ob-tained by a different method in Riehl et al. (2022). Although RSE is necessary for the existence of mul-tiple peaks, it is not sufficient. Strikingly, the results in Riehl et al. (2022) imply that in the limit of large number of loci, it is possible to have a single-peaked landscape where almost any randomly picked pair of loci in any genetic background exhibits RSE. Results on the sufficient conditions for the exis-tence of multiple peaks remain limited. Crona et al. (2013) showed that a system with instances of RSE but no other sign epistasis must have at least two peaks, but no sufficient condition for the existence of general n peaks is known. It has been argued that information on ‘local’ properties based on lower or-der interactions, such as the existence of a few RSE motifs in the landscape, is not likely to provide much information on a global property such as the number of peaks. Motivating arguments for this view, based on Morse theory, were provided in Poelwijk et al. (2011), but a systematic theoretical development of these ideas has been lacking. The results above involving RSE have been based mostly on landscapes without neutral mutations. Re-cent work (Ivankov and Zorin, 2026) has shown that when neutral mutations are allowed, pairwise sign epistasis can be absent from multi-peaked landscapes, but a modified RSE based on composite mutations necessarily exists. Fitness peaks are interesting as end-points of adap-tive walks , whereas the layouts of accessible paths 

show how epistasis can guide the evolution of popu-lations toward fitness peaks. Weinreich et al. (2005) brought into focus the importance of sign epistasis for the strong selection and weak mutation (SSWM) regime, where a non-recombining population evolves toward fitness peaks along accessible paths. In a smooth landscape (which possibly contains magni-tude epistasis but no sign epistasis), all direct paths to a peak (where the distance to the peak decreases monotonically) are accessible, and these are the only accessible paths. Quantitatively, a genotype at Ham-ming distance d from a peak has d! direct paths, corresponding to substituting the d beneficial mu-tations in any order, and all of these paths are ac-cessible. When sign epistasis is present, the sign of fitness change produced by some of these mutations is dependent on the genetic background, and there-fore not all the d! direct paths are fitness-increasing (Weinreich et al., 2005). Sign epistasis therefore pro-vides a mechanism by which genetic interactions can constrain evolution. These ideas were presented more formally in Crona et al. (2013) in the language of fit-ness graphs , which have now become a mainstay of the accessibility literature (see De Visser et al. (2009) for an earlier application). Early empirical work by Weinreich et al. (2006) on a 5-locus landscape in a β-lactamase gene in E. coli 

showed that, out of the 5! = 120 paths from the wild type to the full mutant, only 18 were selectively ac-cessible. Many subsequent studies (De Visser et al., 2009; Carneiro and Hartl, 2010; Kvitek and Sherlock, 2011; Salverda et al., 2011; Schenk et al., 2013; Ma-harjan and Ferenci, 2013; Tufts et al., 2015; Bank et al., 2016; Nishikawa et al., 2021) have established the importance of sign epistasis in empirical land-scapes. 

3A1 Path complexity: the “second ques-tion” of navigability 

Based on our observations so far, we can identify two different ways in which epistasis constrains landscape navigation. The first and most studied issue is that epistasis creates highly rugged (multi-peaked) land-scapes, which means that a population may get stuck at a suboptimal peak. The topic of peak accessibil-ity in rugged landscapes is discussed in detail in the 6next two subsections. The second question, which has received less attention, is whether epistasis may slow down evolution by affecting the lengths of paths. A hypothesis, studied predominantly in the compu-tational complexity literature (Johnson et al., 1988; Sch¨ affer and Yannakakis, 1991; Matouˇ sek and Szab´ o, 2006; Kaznatcheev, 2019; Kaznatcheev and Alferez, 2024), is that accessible paths to fitness peaks may be so long that they cannot be traversed within (compu-tationally) feasible time scales. This problem is or-thogonal to the more traditional concern about evo-lution stalling at local maxima, since it can apply even to single-peaked landscapes. For example, work by Matouˇ sek and Szab´ o (2006) on the performance of local search algorithms essentially constructed single-peaked landscapes on which uniform adaptive walks do not terminate in polynomial time (Kaznatcheev, 2019); that is, the number of steps to the fitness peak from a random starting point grows faster than any power of L (the number of loci) when L is sufficiently large. In the same vein, Kaznatcheev (2019) con-structed certain semismooth landscapes (defined as possibly having sign epistasis but not RSE) where the single fitness peak cannot be reached by a greedy walk in polynomial time. To drive home the implica-tion, Kaznatcheev (2019) mentions that in one of the landscapes studied therein, a selective process “with a genotype on just 120 loci, and, with new set of point-mutants and selective sweep at a rate of one every second, would require more seconds than the time since the Big Bang” to arrive at the fitness peak. However, one should be careful not to draw conclu-sions about evolutionary processes in nature from this work. On the one hand, it is empirically unknown whether such landscapes exist or are common, and, from a biologist’s perspective, the studied models, in-spired by the goal to develop fast search algorithms in computer science, represent gross oversimplifica-tions of the evolutionary process in nature (see also Section 4). Nonetheless, we draw attention to the fact that the topic remains underexplored, and un-like the case of fitness peaks reviewed above, general bounds connecting the number and lengths of acces-sible paths to epistasis are sparse in the literature. We hope that future work clarifies the relevance of this “path complexity” question in the navigation of fitness landscapes. 

# 3B Peak accessibility in rugged land-scapes 

Intuitively, one expects that the accessibility of high-fitness genotypes correlates negatively with the num-ber of peaks, and this expectation was confirmed by the comparative study of small empirical landscapes mentioned previously (Szendro et al., 2013b). How-ever, theoretical studies of probabilistic fitness land-scape models with tunable degrees of ruggedness sug-gest that the relation between ruggedness and acces-sibility is considerably more complex. The most detailed understanding of accessibility has been achieved so far for a model where fitness val-ues are assigned randomly to genotypes as indepen-dent, identically distributed random variables (Kauff-man and Levin, 1987), also referred to as the House-of-Cards (HoC) model. HoC landscapes are, in a sta-tistical sense, maximally rugged and therefore serve as a null model for the comparison to empirical data. In the HoC model, the probability of existence of at least one accessible path between two genotypes with fitness f and f ′ > f increases abruptly from near zero to near unity at a threshold value of the difference 

F (f ′) − F (f ), where F (x) = Prob[ f ≤ x] is the cu-mulative fitness probability distribution (Schmiegelt and Krug, 2023). This implies that high fitness peaks are likely to be accessible from distant low fitness genotypes, and as a consequence possess surprisingly large adaptive basins (Pahujani and Krug, 2025; Oros and Krug, 2026). When fitness correlations are introduced into the HoC model the ruggedness of the landscapes gener-ally decreases, but the effect on accessibility varies dramatically depending on the specific setup. For ex-ample, in the NK model the tuning parameter is the number of epistatic interaction partners K of a par-ticular locus (Kauffman and Weinberger, 1989), and when K is small compared to the total number L of loci the landscapes has low ruggedness. Neverthe-less, the probability of existence of accessible paths between distant genotypes in the NK model tends to zero irrespective of the fitness difference when L be-comes large at constant K, implying that these land-7scapes are much less accessible than their HoC coun-terpart (which corresponds formally to K = L − 1). The low accessibility is due to the sparseness of the network of epistatic interactions, which leads to the emergence of motifs of reciprocal sign epistasis that are independent of genetic background and therefore block all long-distance accessible paths traversing the genotype space (Hwang et al., 2018). This shows that local fitness peaks do not necessarily constitute the main obstacles to landscape navigation. The results for the NK model contrast sharply with the accessibility properties of the RMF model, where the maximally rough HoC landscape is smoothened by an overall fitness gradient towards a reference se-quence (Neidhart et al., 2014). In this case any de-gree of smoothening makes the reference genotype ac-cessible with high probability (Hegarty and Martins-son, 2014). Taken together, the examples of the NK and RMF model indicate that, by itself, landscape ruggedness is generally a poor predictor of peak ac-cessibility, because the path structure induced by the fitness correlations is very different in the two mod-els. Thus, the potential for navigating long distances across the landscape is not necessarily inhibited by ruggedness. 

3B1 Universal epistasis 

Another facet of the complex interplay between ruggedness and accessibility was uncovered recently with the identification of a class of fitness landscapes characterized by a global constraint termed univer-sal epistasis (Crona et al., 2023). To explain it, it is useful to think of genotype sequences as sets of muta-tions, a representation that can be made precise for binary sequences (Das et al., 2020). Specifically, a binary sequence of length L is mapped to the subset of loci with allele 1, signifying the presence of a mu-tation. For example, for L = 4, the sequence (0110) maps to the set {2, 3}. In the spirit of ‘beanbag ge-netics’ (Haldane, 1964), a genotype is viewed as a bag of mutations (relative to a reference sequence). To define the concept of universal epistasis, con-sider adding a set of mutations to two different back-ground genotypes g, g ′, where one (say g′) is a sub-set of the other. The mutations that are added are not contained in either of the background genotypes. Then universal epistasis holds if the difference in the fitness effects of adding the mutations to the two backgrounds has a definite sign, such that the effect is always larger (positive epistasis) or smaller (negative epistasis) in background g compared to g′ ⊂ g. When universal epistasis is negative, it can be proved that any peak genotype is accessible via all direct paths from all its subset and superset genotypes (Krug and Oros, 2024; Pahujani and Krug, 2025). In the exam-ple above, if genotypes (0110) is a peak, it is acces-sible from (0000) , (0100) , (0010) , (1110) , (0111) and (1111). This implies a lower bound on the size of adaptive basins of the peaks, as well as the existence of (at least) two genotypes from which all peaks can be accessed: The “wild type” (00 . . . 0) and the “full mutant” (11 . . . 1). In this sense, universal negative epistasis is associated with the ease of evolutionary navigation to fitness peaks. Whether the sub- and superset genotypes make up a significant part of the adaptive basins, which are likely dominated by indi-rect accessible paths, remains to be seen. It is worth mentioning that universal negative epis-tasis arises naturally in fitness landscapes defined by a nonlinear phenotype-fitness map applied to a non-epistatic phenotypic trait that is a linear function of the genotype, a construction that is familiar from Fisher’s geometric model (Hwang et al., 2017) and models of global epistasis (Diaz-Colunga et al., 2023). 

3B2 Extra-dimensional bypasses, allele graph connectivity and estimating navigability 

Real fitness landscapes are hyper-astronomically large (Louis, 2016) and any landscape that has been empirically measured or theoretically modeled is only a subset of the larger landscape. Sub-landscapes can arise when the landscape is generated from a lim-ited number of loci or when the number of possi-ble alleles at each locus (a.k.a. the alphabet cardi-nality ) is limited. This can result in an underesti-mation of the number of accessible paths in a land-scape, since allowing for more alleles at each locus can open up extra-dimensional bypasses to the global peak (Wu et al., 2016; Zagorski et al., 2016; Srivas-8tava et al., 2023). Moreover, Schmiegelt and Krug (2023) showed that the threshold value of the fitness difference between the initial and final genotype in the HoC landscape ( F (f ′)−F (f )), see section above) required for a high probability of an accessible path between the two genotypes decreases with the num-ber of alleles at each locus. On the other hand, Schmiegelt and Krug (2023) demonstrated that decreasing the connectivity be-tween alleles in the allele graph raises the thresh-old of the fitness difference required for the existence of an accessible path, thereby reducing the accessi-bility of high-fitness peaks. This reduced connec-tivity of alleles becomes biologically relevant when examining protein fitness landscapes, wherein cer-tain amino-acid transitions may not be possible via single-nucleotide changes due to the constraints im-posed by the genetic code (Rozhoˇ nov´ a et al., 2024). Therefore, failing to account for the genetic code may lead to an overestimation of the global peak reach-ability in protein fitness landscapes. A similar re-duction in the overall landscape navigability due to low allele-graph connectivity was also observed in the Biomorphs fitness landscape, which is a landscape of two dimensional developmental phenotypes (Martin et al., 2024), wherein alleles can only change by a single unit per mutational step (Srivastava, 2024). Merely having more accessible paths to the global peak does not guarantee that the global peak will be reached by evolving populations: Studying RMF landscapes with varying levels of ruggedness, Sri-vastava et al. (2023) showed that even though the number of accessible paths to the global peak grew with increasing alphabet cardinality, the probability of reaching the global peak (as measured by the frac-tion of accessible paths to the global peak, out of all accessible paths starting in the antipodal genotypes of the global peak) decreased. 

3B3 Basin size, accessible paths and naviga-bility 

The concern expressed by Wright (1932) that rugged landscapes may impede evolution naturally suggests the intuition that peaks in highly rugged landscapes have small adaptive basins. In the light of recent work, however, this intuition needs to be revisited (see Hernando et al. (2019) for a related discussion in the context of combinatorial optimization). An empirically-motivated landscape model of bac-terial fitness in antibiotics (Das et al., 2020) found that peaks have large overlapping adaptive basins. Papkou et al. (2023) found an empirical landscape of the metabolic enzyme dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) to be highly rugged, and all high-fitness peaks essentially shared a single and very large adap-tive basin. Similarly, the landscape of bacterial tran-scription factor TetR was found to be highly rugged yet also highly navigable (Westmann et al., 2024b). Further, as mentioned above, the highly rugged HoC model also has large adaptive basins; for an alpha-bet cardinality of 4, an average peak basin contains about 52.8% of all genotypes when L is large (Oros and Krug, 2026). These findings challenge the idea that high ruggedness necessarily restricts accessible paths. However, it is not yet known what underly-ing epistatic patterns can make a landscape rugged while generating large adaptive basins, and whether such landscapes are common in nature. Another related concern about adaptive basins is their utility, in general, for predicting the reachabil-ity of peaks. The study of the DHFR landscape by Papkou et al. (2023) found a high correlation be-tween peak fitness and basin sizes, and suggested this as an explanation of the the high reachability of high-fitness peaks. A similar positive relationship between peak heights and basin sizes in both RMF landscapes and empirical landscapes of the bacterial ParD–ParE toxin–antitoxin system was reported by Srivastava et al. (2023). However, a numerical study of several theoretical and empirical landscapes (Li and Zhang, 2025) concluded that a positive corre-lation between peak height and basin size is general, and it does not in itself imply high reachability (see also Oros and Krug, 2026). The reachability instead depends on specifics of the landscape (Li et al., 2025; Hunter et al., 2026). Moreover, in two empirical fit-ness landscapes studied in Reia and Campos (2020), reachability of peaks starting from the wild type se-quence tended to increase with the number of ac-cessible paths, but the relationship between the two was quite irregular. Thus, adaptive basin sizes or the 9number of accessible paths may not have sufficient information about the reachability of peaks in gen-eral, and should therefore be regarded with caution as measures of navigability. More effective measures may rely on further details of how basins or paths are distributed across genotype space. 

# 3C GP maps and evolvability in NC graphs 

So far, we have focused on genotype–fitness maps, that directly assign fitness values to genotypes, by bypassing intermediate levels of biological organiza-tion and invoking a somewhat abstract concept of fitness. However, biological systems are organized across multiple concrete scales. Information is stored in DNA or RNA sequences, where molecular phe-notypes such as RNA secondary structure are rele-vant; these sequences are transcribed and translated into amino acid chains, where protein structure and binding affinity become the pertinent phenotypes. Multiple cells assemble into tissues, which in turn constitute an organism, and at these higher levels, more macroscopic traits, such as tissue morphology or body plan, are the fitness determining phenotypes. Thus, genotypes can map to different phenotypes depending on the biological scale and question un-der consideration (Pigliucci, 2010; Gjuvsland et al., 2013). These genotype–phenotype (GP) maps charac-terize how mutations generate phenotypic variation, for instance, by quantifying how often mutations pre-serve the phenotype or how many distinct phenotypes can be generated via single mutational steps. Despite the variation in scale and in the definition of fitness-relevant phenotypes, the literature on geno-type–phenotype (GP) maps—which has been shaped strongly by empirical findings and extensive com-putational models—has identified several “universal properties” of these maps (Ahnert, 2017). Multiple reviews exist on the observed shared properties of GP maps (see, e.g., Manrubia et al. (2021b)), but for completeness, we briefly mention them here. GP maps show (i) Genotypic redundancy, i.e., there are many more genotypes than phenotypes. (ii) Phe-notypic bias, i.e., the distribution of the number of genotypes per phenotype is skewed and Zipfian in character, with a few phenotypes realized by many genotypes while most phenotypes are represented by only a small number of genotypes. (iii) Increased ro-bustness of phenotypes, wherein the robustness scales logarithmically with the frequency of the phenotype 

ρp ∼ a+b·log( fp) rather than linearly. (iv) A positive correlation between phenotypic robustness and phe-notypic evolvability . (v) Shape-space covering prop-erty, wherein the majority of phenotypes lie in close proximity to any genotype. (vi) Exponential bias to-wards “simple” phenotypes, i.e., phenotypes that re-quire less information to be encoded algorithmically (Johnston et al., 2022). Schaper and Louis (2014) studied how GP map properties shape the evolution of haploid, Wright-Fisher populations exploring a neutral plateau and found that more frequent phenotypes are much more likely to be attained, with their discovery times be-ing orders of magnitude shorter than those of less frequent phenotypes. Moreover, using a 12-locus RNA GP map, the authors initialized populations on a large neutral network with mutational connec-tions to two fitter target phenotypes that differed in their probabilities of being reached, and showed that frequent phenotypes can fix in a population even when fitter but less frequent phenotypes are accessi-ble. This highlights the importance of the GP map in addition to the fitness values of phenotypes in steer-ing evolutionary dynamics. In this vein, arguments from algorithmic information theory provide a non-adaptationist explanation for the occurrence of sim-ple, symmetric structures: because such structures require less information to encode, they are more likely to arise as phenotypic variants through ran-dom mutation (Johnston et al., 2022). More recently, Malone et al. (2025) used a computational model of leaf development to show that developmental bias to-wards simpler leaf morphologies could explain phylo-genetic trends even in the absence of selection. Whereas most of the above studies examined GP maps without selection, Greenbury et al. (2022) ex-plicitly linked the GP map structure to the naviga-bility of fitness landscapes. In a given GP map, it is not obvious which phenotype corresponds to the highest fitness, and this can also vary with the en-vironment or other extrinsic factors. Thus, when 10 studying adaptation on GP maps, a target phenotype is sometimes arbitrarily chosen and assigned highest fitness. The remaining phenotypes are then either as-signed random fitness values or fitness values based on similarity to the target phenotype. Greenbury et al. (2022) randomly assigned fitness values to phe-notypes for three biologically realistic GP maps and randomly chose target phenotypes that were always assigned the highest fitness. They found that even under this random, uncorrelated fitness assignment, the GP map properties mentioned above facilitated the accessibility of the target phenotypes. This im-plies that navigability of fitness landscapes is facili-tated by the features shared by most GP maps. Further, Srivastava et al. (2026) adopted a coarse-grained view of the GP map by studying it as a graph of neutral components (NCs) – wherein the NCs con-stituted the nodes of the NC graph, whereas edges were defined by the presence of point mutations con-necting two NCs. Using this, the authors identified the NC evolvability (ϵN C ) as the key GP map prop-erty determining the number of peaks and the land-scape navigability under random fitness assignment. Note that the NC evolvability would be equivalent to the phenotypic evolvability if all genotypes map-ping to a given phenotype were connected within a single neutral component, however they can some-times be fragmented into multiple disconnected com-ponents. The authors found the probability of an NC being a fitness peak to be inversely proportional to its evolvability, i.e., PN C (peak ) = 1  

> ϵN C +1

. This re-lation generalizes a classical result for the genotypic HoC landscape (Kauffman and Levin, 1987) to GP map based landscapes. Further, the average fitness of peaks was found to increase with their evolvability, regardless of the distribution from which the fitness values were drawn. This implies that when evolvabil-ity scales positively with NC size, larger peaks will also have higher fitness. Finally, they also derived a minimum threshold of mean evolvability of a GP map above which the corresponding random fitness landscapes will have non-zero navigability. However, as mentioned in the sections above, the navigability of a landscape only guarantees the ex-istence of an accessible path to the target, but that path may not be traversed by evolving populations. This will be especially true when populations can get trapped on large neutral plateaus, which might take a long time to traverse (Manrubia and Cuesta, 2015). To exclude enormously long accessible paths from contributing to the navigability of a target, Green-bury et al. (2022) set a computational threshold on the path length beyond which the search for an ac-cessible path to the target was terminated. Further, Greenbury et al. (2022) defined a more dynamic mea-sure – the evolutionary navigability, as the average probability that the adaptive path reaches a target phenotype from a source phenotype via an accessible path. Although Greenbury et al. (2022) showed that accessible paths between pairs of functional RNA se-quences were also likely to be utilized under evo-lutionary dynamics (i.e., landscape navigability and 

evolutionary navigability were similar), in the case of the Biomorphs GP map, the landscape navigabil-ity was high under a correlated fitness assignment, but a very small fraction of the evolving populations could reach the target phenotypes (Srivastava, 2024). This could be because of the reduced allele graph con-nectivity and bias towards simple phenotypes in the Biomorphs GP map. Therefore, much like genotype-fitness maps, summary statistics for GP maps, such as landscape navigability are useful, but can some-times be incomplete predictors of the evolutionary dynamics on the resulting fitness landscapes. 

# 3D Synthesis of genotype-fitness map and GP map approaches: current state and future directions 

The accessibility literature has largely focused on complex genotype–fitness maps, but with a limited role for neutrality; conversely, the literature on em-pirically motivated GP maps has primarily empha-sized GP map structure and typically focused on neu-tral networks or considered very simple fitness assign-ments, such as random phenotype-to-fitness maps. However, ultimately, GP maps and genotype–fitness maps are connected and represent different aspects of the study of evolution. There is therefore a need for closer integration of these two approaches. In random genotype–fitness maps, alphabet car-11 dinality, i.e., the number of alleles per site and the connectivity between the alleles, play a central role in determining landscape ruggedness, as they directly control the number of mutational neighbors available to each genotype. In GP maps with random fitness assignment, ruggedness is governed by the evolvabil-ity of neutral components, which reflects the number of distinct phenotypes accessible from a given neutral network. These quantities are conceptually similar, as both correspond to measures of node degree in genotype space and in the neutral component (NC) graph, respectively, and thus on the topology of the genotype or phenotype space. Moreover, the alpha-bet cardinality and allele graph connectivity can also influence the mean evolvability of a GP map. However, these quantities differ in an important way: alphabet cardinality and allele graph connectiv-ity are typically uniform or vary very slightly across all genotypes (e.g., via the codon table), at least when the genotype graph is complete (substantial in-homogeneity in genotype connectivity can arise due to missing genotypes, as is often the case in large-scale empirical data sets (Papkou et al., 2023; West-mann et al., 2024a,b; Li and Zhang, 2025)). In con-trast, NC evolvability can vary over several orders of magnitude within a GP map due to phenotypic bias (Schaper et al., 2012). Furthermore, increasing al-phabet cardinality and allele graph connectivity nec-essarily expand the total size of the genotype space, thereby uniformly increasing mutational connectiv-ity. By contrast, evolvability depends on the size and structure of neutral components and is therefore de-termined by the genotype–phenotype mapping itself; as a result, the same number of genotypes can give rise to markedly different distributions of evolvability (Greenbury et al., 2016). As discussed in the sections above, alphabet car-dinality, allele graph connectivity, and the average NC evolvability all enhance the navigability of the corresponding fitness landscapes. However, neither of these quantities guarantees that evolving popula-tions will reach a target genotype/phenotype (i.e., a fitness peak). Instead, populations may become trapped either at local optima or in large neutral networks called entropic traps, with the latter hav-ing been noted to be easier to escape (van Nimwe-gen and Crutchfield, 1999). For example, Srivastava (2024) showed that in the Biomorphs fitness land-scape, on average, 32% of adaptive walks terminated in an entropic trap (defined as walks that continued beyond the threshold of 10 6 steps), whereas 68% of the walks terminated on a local peak. In addition, mutation bias (Cano and Payne, 2020; Cano et al., 2022) and phenotypic bias (Schaper and Louis, 2014; Dingle et al., 2022; Martin et al., 2024) can also steer populations away from the global peak despite the existence of accessible paths. Therefore, landscape navigability should not merely be quantified by epistasis, ruggedness, acces-sible paths to the global peak, or the basin sizes in the genotype-fitness map. Rather, there is a need for measures that incorporate the effects of alphabet car-dinality of the genotype space, the structure of the in-termediate genotype-phenotype map, and the result-ing neutral networks (specifically their evolvability), along with biases at the genotypic and phenotypic level. To this end, we propose a new measure of naviga-bility, the navigational ruggedness RN :

RN = 1 − X 

> peak ∈{ all peaks }

Preach (peak) · frel (peak) ,

where the summation is over all peaks in the land-scape, Preach (peak) is the probability of reaching a given peak under a specified evolutionary dynamics that terminates at peaks, and frel (peak) is the rel-ative fitness of the peak with respect to the global peak fitness. If high peaks have a high probability of being reached, then RN ∼ 0. In Figure 2, we show four different measures of ruggedness – (i) navigational ruggedness RN ,(ii) baseline ruggedness, defined using the equally weighted average peak fitness, i.e. 

RB = 1 − X

> peak ∈{ all peaks }

1

Npeaks 

frel (peak) ,

where Npeaks is the total number of peaks in the land-scape, (iii) the number of genotypes that are peaks, and (iv) the number of genotypes that do not be-long to the adaptive basin of the global peak. We 12 Figure 2: Measures of ruggedness normalized to their values for a HoC landscape: Navigational rugged-ness (red hexagons, calculated based on 5000 random adaptive walks ), baseline ruggedness (green circles), number of peaks (yellow diamonds) and the number of genotypes that are not in the global peak basin (blue stars), for four different classes of landscapes with L = 4 loci and alphabet cardinality a = 4: a House-of-cards landscape (hoc), an NK landscape (NK) ( N = L, K = 1, intermediate epistasis), inter-action between adjacent loci and periodic boundary conditions), an RMF landscape (with intermediate ruggedness ) and a custom-designed highly rugged landscape with alternating high and low fitness (alt; see Methods). All random fitness contributions were drawn from a Normal distribution N (0 , 1). computed these measures for the HoC, NK ( K = 1), RMF and a fitness alternating landscape which was designed to be highly rugged, with many low fit-ness peaks with large basin sizes. All landscapes had 

L = 4 loci and alphabet cardinality a = 4. To enable comparison, we plotted the measures relative to the values for the HoC landscape. Whereas the baseline ruggedness RB is based solely on the mean peak finesses, the navigational rugged-ness RN also accounts for the probability of reaching the peaks. We find that RB > RN for the HoC, NK and RMF landscapes but not for the alternating land-scape, due to the anti-correlation between the peak heights and basin sizes in the alternating landscape. Further, both NK and RMF landscapes have a lower number of genotypes in peaks and a lower number of genotypes that do not belong to the adaptive basin of the global peak than the HoC landscape. More-over, RN of RMF landscapes remains substantially lower than RB and also much lower than the RN of NK and HoC landscapes, reinforcing the point that the global peak is readily reachable in RMF land-scapes (Hegarty and Martinsson, 2014). This can also be seen by observing the low number of geno-types that do not belong to the global peak basin. Thus, the navigational ruggedness RN captures im-portant features of landscape navigation that are not captured by the baseline ruggedness RB or the num-ber of peaks. Notably, the navigational ruggedness RN is a sum-mary of various landscape features, such as peak heights, basin sizes, etc., which are all relevant for navigability. The measure does not inform us about the specific feature facilitating landscape navigation, but any causative feature will correlate with the nav-igational ruggedness and can thus be identified. For instance, in Figure 2, baseline ruggedness RB is not a good indicator of RN for the RMF and alternat-ing landscapes – in the former, it overestimates the ruggedness, whereas it underestimates it in the latter. Conversely, the number of genotypes not in the global peak basin underestimates ruggedness in RMF land-scapes and overestimates it in the alternating land-scape. 

# 4 Fitness landscape navigation beyond adaptive walks and static landscapes 

Up to here, our review has focused on studies that quantify fitness landscape navigation in the context of strong selection and weak mutation and thus im-plicitly or explicitly assume that adaptation occurs as discrete, monomorphic steps in the genotype space. Moreover, these studies assume that the mapping of genotype to phenotype or fitness is constant over 13 time. Here, we highlight studies that have relaxed these assumptions. Although it offers greater biolog-ical realism, this work is often limited to numerical approaches because the navigation process is difficult to quantify analytically. 

# 4A Weak selection and clonal inter-ference 

One key assumption that has facilitated the analyti-cal study of adaptation on fitness landscapes is that of strong selection and weak mutation (Gillespie, 1983). In this regime, exclusively beneficial mutations ap-pear and fix sequentially, such that adaptation can be approximated by a (strictly hill-climbing) Markov process of monomorphic steps in the genotype space. However, in natural populations, deleterious muta-tions can fix through drift, and multiple genotypes can segregate simultaneously leading to potential in-terference of beneficial variants and hitchhiking of deleterious variants. A number of fitness landscape studies have ad-dressed the weak mutation regime, but without re-quiring strong selection. Here, the population evolves through a sequential origin-fixation process during which deleterious mutations have a non-zero fixa-tion probability (McCandlish and Stoltzfus, 2014). In this regime, evolution does not terminate at a fitness peak but instead reaches an equilibrium distribution in genotype space in the long term. In cases where the underlying resulting Markov chain is reversible, the equilibrium distribution depends only on the fit-ness values and not on the neighborhood structure of the landscape (Berg et al., 2004; Sella and Hirsh, 2005; Manhart et al., 2011). McCandlish et al. (2014) showed that the expected selection coefficient of the first substitution is always negative when starting from the equilibrium distribu-tion in the House-of-Cards model. The intuition be-hind this is that, even though deleterious and benefi-cial substitutions are equally frequent at equilibrium (Sella and Hirsh, 2005), the population spends a long time at rare, high-fitness genotypes in the equilibrium state, making initial deleterious substitutions pre-dominant when starting from equilibrium. Related to the question of fitness landscape navigation, Mc-Candlish (2013) found, among other results, that the time taken to reach a focal genotype starting from the equilibrium state (conceptualized in the paper as the ’findability’ of the genotype) increases with the focal genotype’s fitness; nonetheless, findability of a geno-type did not have any simple and general relationship with the fitness rank, implying that the shape of the fitness landscape is a crucial factor. In a theoreti-cal two-locus landscape with a single peak studied by McCandlish (2013), genotypes further away from a peak became less findable as the peak fitness was increased, whereas the findability of the neighbors of the peak first increased (as selection kept the pop-ulation near the peak) and then decreased (as selec-tion heavily penalized leaving the peak) with increas-ing peak fitness. Findability was ultimately found to be influenced by a complex interplay of fitness values, landscape shape, and population size. Ser-vajean and Bitbol (2023) studied the fitness of the first peak reached starting from a random genotype in the weak- mutation regime under varying popula-tion sizes (i.e., varying the effectiveness of selection). A major observation was that the mean fitness of the first peak reached was often maximized at an inter-mediate population size rather than in the strong-selection limit. Related to Wright’s Shifting Balance theory (Wright, 1982; Coyne et al., 1997; Joshi, 1999), Servajean and Bitbol (2023) noted that while larger population sizes bias evolution toward larger fitness-increasing steps, they reduce exploration of the fit-ness landscape through paths involving deleterious or weakly beneficial mutations, and this trade-off may be relevant regarding efficient navigation of rugged fitness landscapes. Further in this direction, Serva-jean et al. (2025) found that in populations subdi-vided into demes, suppression of selection caused by migration asymmetries (Abbara and Bitbol, 2023) of-ten led to the higher fitness peaks being reached first. Relaxing also the weak-mutation assumption leads beyond sequential origin-fixation dynamics into aclonal-interference regime where multiple mutants compete within the population. In the sequential origin-fixation regime, a population can escape from a fitness peak g to a fitter genotype g2, which is two mutations away, only by fixing a deleterious single mutant g1 as an intermediate step ( i.e. , it has to cross 14 a fitness valley). In the clonal-interference regime, individuals of type g1 may continue to be present in the population at low frequencies, allowing a sec-ond mutation on the background of this genotype to produce the genotype g2, which can now fix in the population. This process is called ’stochastic tunnel-ing’ (Iwasa et al., 2004; Weinreich and Chao, 2005). For a given mutation rate, the critical population size above which the tunneling process dominates over sequential fixation was quantified by Weinreich and Chao (2005). Weissman et al. (2009) found that such a threshold population size exists also for wider fit-ness valleys comprising multiple mutations. Thus, again the population size was identified as an impor-tant factor influencing the navigation of the fitness landscape. Relatively few studies have examined the effect of clonal interference on the navigation of larger rugged fitness landscapes. Szendro et al. (2013a) studied evolution on an experimentally-determined 8 locus landscape of Aspergillus niger as well as a variant of the RMF landscape. With increasing population size in the simulations, the dynamics became ’greedier’ and more deterministic due to the preferential fixa-tion of mutations of large effect (similar to a shift toward greedy walk-like adaptive evolution at high mutation supply rate seen in an antibiotic resistance model in Das et al., 2025). With an even higher pop-ulation size, second-step mutants that help cross fit-ness valleys were produced more frequently, and the dynamics became more stochastic due to the large number of second-step mutants that could be pro-duced. Another study of a model fitness landscape with a large number of loci and sparse second-order epistatic interactions (Guo et al., 2019) found that stochastic tunneling caused the system to effectively “hop” between local fitness peaks. The time between hoppings increased as adaptation progressed, and led to a logarithmic fitness increase with time, sim-ilar to the slow relaxation of energy in certain spin-glass models in physics. Overall, these studies high-light that the navigation of fitness landscapes is cru-cially altered in a complex manner when the strong-selection weak-mutation assumption is relaxed. It re-mains to be investigated how landscape navigation through drift and tunneling affects the “path com-plexity” problem discussed in Section 3A. 

# 4B Recombination and genome orga-nization 

The fitness landscape theory discussed so far consid-ers the genotype space to be haploid and reproduc-tion to be clonal. This is a gross simplification in a biological world that contains organisms of differ-ent ploidies and in which recombination occurs both via sex and horizontal gene transfer. Recombination significantly affects the navigation of fitness land-scapes by allele shuffling between segregating geno-types (Bank, 2022), whereas different ploidies alter the topology of the fitness landscape (somewhat sim-ilar to altering alphabet cardinality) and generate the possibility for dominance or epistasis at a single lo-cus (reviewed in Li and Bank, 2024). Theory predicts that recombining populations are more likely to be-come stalled at local optima of a rugged fitness land-scape (Weinreich and Chao, 2005; De Visser et al., 2009; Park and Krug, 2011; Nowak et al., 2014). Li et al. (2024) examined the cumulative effect of re-combination and standing genetic variation on hap-loid adaptation (without new mutation) on tunably rugged landscapes, reinforcing the finding that high recombination hinders adaptation on rugged land-scapes by breaking apart high-fitness combinations of alleles. The authors also found that adaptation from standing genetic variation with recombination followed a smoother-than-average path of allele fixa-tions on the fitness landscape, indicating altered fit-ness landscape navigation. In the presence of recombination, genome organi-zation (i.e., the physical location of loci on chromo-somes) becomes relevant for fitness landscape navi-gation. Recombination can strongly speed up adap-tation in rugged fitness landscapes if the landscape displays a modular structure that is respected by re-combination (Watson et al., 2011). On the other hand, structural variants, such as chromosomal inver-sions, can suppress recombination and promote local adaptation (Kirkpatrick and Barton, 2006); translo-cations, fusions, or fissions can alter the recombina-tion distance between interacting loci. So far, little is known about the role of structural variants and 15 recombination on fitness landscape navigation. 

# 4C Evolution of the genotype space 

In general, fitness landscape theory assumes a land-scape of a fixed size. The study of extra-dimensional bypasses can conceptually be seen as new paths revealed on an existing, larger, landscape. How-ever, genome size evolution (for example via gene or genome duplications, gene loss, insertions, or deletions) could fundamentally change the genotype space in which adaptation occurs. In this vein, Mar-tin and Ahnert (2021) examined the architecture of the RNA sequence–structure GP map with indels and showed that the robustness to point mutations was fairly correlated with robustness to insertions and deletions. The authors also showed that point mu-tations and indels have similar probabilities of gen-erating alternative phenotypes. However, the pos-sibility that the genotype space itself evolves has not received much attention in the field of fitness landscape theory, although the organization and size of genomes have been shaped by billions of years of evolution through processes such as duplications, deletions, and large-scale rearrangements (Hogeweg, 2012; Manrubia et al., 2021b). It is unknown whether features such as the navigability or ruggedness of fit-ness landscapes are under selection over long time scales, and future work may uncover conserved struc-tural features that facilitate the navigation of fitness landscapes. 

# 4D Environment, ecology and chang-ing landscapes 

The study of fitness landscapes is deeply rooted in evolutionary biology, with a focus on mutation and selection as the main evolutionary forces driv-ing landscape navigation. Moreover, the assumption of a fixed fitness topography implies constant selec-tion pressures on evolutionary timescales, thereby implying that fast environmental fluctuations and frequency-dependent interactions can be ignored. However, recent empirical studies have called into question the common separation of ecological and evolutionary timescales, and the study of fitness land-scapes is increasingly considering ecological factors in various ways. Firstly, abiotic environmental change, e.g., via sea-sonality, catastrophic events, climate change, etc., can affect navigation of fitness landscapes when the topography of the landscape is altered, and increasing empirical evidence suggests that fitness landscapes vary greatly across environments (reviewed in Bank, 2022). Mustonen and L¨ assig (2009) coined the word “fitness seascapes” for fitness landscape theory that incorporates the effect of fluctuating environments on evolution. Regarding navigation on fitness seascapes and other environment-dependent fitness landscapes, some notable issues are the potentials for long-term maintenance of polymorphism (see Bank (2022) for a discussion) and irreversibility of adaptive walks (Das et al., 2022). A significant application has been to an-timicrobial resistance (Mira et al., 2015; Ogbunugafor et al., 2016; Das et al., 2020; King et al., 2025), and recent work by Manivannan and Ogbunugafor (2026) examined how fitness seascapes vary across systems and scales, with particular focus on antimicrobial re-sistance. Environmental change can also trigger epi-genetic changes, and recent theoretical work (Mall et al., 2026) has suggested that epigenetic switch-ing can promote better navigation of rugged land-scapes by effectively smoothing them. A computa-tional study of adaptation on RMF fitness seascapes found that the temporal variation can help recom-bining populations to escape from local fitness peaks and induce a long-term evolutionary advantage of re-combination (Nowak et al., 2014). Secondly, species interactions can generate a meta-fitness landscape of a community, in which the in-teracting species experience different and potentially opposing fitness peaks. One incorporation of species interactions was provided by Kauffman and Johnsen (1991) who extended the probabilistic N K fitness landscape model for ecological communities. When simulating adaptive walks on small landscapes of this kind, Habl¨ utzel et al. (2026) found that navigation on the community fitness landscape towards a species’ global peak is overall impeded by species interactions. More research is needed to quantify the implications of species interactions for navigating larger fitness 16 landscapes. Thirdly, intraspecific interactions (e.g., via re-source competition) could generate fitness seascapes that incorporate frequency-dependent interactions. Amado and Bank (2024) simulated evolution on eco-evolutionary fitness landscapes that mapped geno-type to resource traits, which mapped to fitness via a MacArthur-like resource-consumer model. Adapta-tion on the resulting fitness landscapes (in the pres-ence of mutation, selection, and genetic drift) led to sustained diversity with semi-stable equilibria that depended on the ruggedness of the genotype-trait map. However, no general theory exists on how in-traspecific interactions alter the shape and the navi-gation of fitness landscapes. Finally, explicit population dynamics, i.e., the con-sideration of population size change, may alter nav-igation on fitness landscapes. Here, extinction be-comes a possible outcome of evolution on the land-scape, such that fitness valleys could pose not only barriers to higher fitness but also dangers to the sur-vival of an adapting population (Bell, 2017; Uecker et al., 2026). Moreover, the population size deter-mines the mutational input to an evolving popula-tion, which, in turn, can alter the speed at which adaptation can proceed and the amount of (clonal) interference (see Section 4A). Whereas there exist several examples of studies that have considered con-stant population size as a parameter in models of fitness landscape navigation (Szendro et al., 2013a; Li et al., 2024), we are not aware of fitness landscape theory that has systematically investigated the effect of population dynamics on the navigation of fitness landscapes. 

# 5 Discussion 

In this paper, we reviewed concepts, measures, and results pertaining to fitness landscape navigation, with a focus on models that map a discrete (hyper-cubic) genotype space to phenotypes and fitness. We highlight how both the topology and the topography of the fitness landscape affect how it is traversed by evolution. The term ’navigability’ is commonly used in a regime in which a population evolves through beneficial or neutral single-mutational steps, and a substantial part of our paper (section 3) surveys the growing literature on landscape navigation in this field. Our review of the literature shows that no sin-gle measure of the shape of fitness landscapes serves as a satisfactory measure of navigability. To this end, we proposed a measure called navigational ruggedness 

which depends explicitly on average evolutionary out-comes, and only implicitly on detailed features of the landscape (through their effect on the evolutionary process). This allows for an improved comparison of the navigability of different fitness landscapes. Whereas navigability is most commonly studied in the regime of adaptive walks on static landscapes, Section 4 of our review shows how the navigation pro-cess can change fundamentally in realistic regimes be-yond this standard assumption. Measures of naviga-bility, on the other hand, have been developed mostly with a focus on accessible paths. However, naviga-bility depends not only on the shape of the fitness landscape but also on the evolutionary forces under which it is navigated. It remains for future work to examine the utility of existing navigability measures or to develop new measures applicable across diverse evolutionary regimes. 

# 6 Methods 

# 6A Generating the landscapes 

The genotype space was generated by enumerating all 

aL genotypes as tuples of length L. Each locus could take a integer values in the set A = {0, 1, . . . , a −

1}, and the full genotype space was obtained as the Cartesian product of this set across all L loci. For the landscapes in Figure 2, we used L = 4 , a = 4. 

HoC landscapes 

The HoC landscapes were generated by assigning in-dependent and identically distributed random vari-ables drawn from the Normal distribution N (0 , 1) to each genotype in the genotype space. The landscape was linearly normalized to the interval [0 , 1] by sub-tracting the minimum fitness and dividing by the fit-ness range. 17 NK landscapes 

The NK landscapes were constructed following the standard NK model, where the fitness contribution of each locus depended on its own allele and those at K

interacting partner loci. For each locus i ∈ 1, . . . , L ,interaction partners were assigned deterministically as the next K loci under periodic boundary condi-tions, ensuring a uniform interaction structure across the genome. Each locus was associated with a lookup table mapping allele combinations to fitness contribu-tions, with values drawn independently from a stan-dard normal distribution for each unique combina-tion. Genotype fitness was computed as the sum of locus-specific contributions and subsequently normal-ized to [0 , 1] by min–max scaling over the full land-scape. We used K = 1 to generate landscapes of intermediate ruggedness. 

RMF landscapes 

To generate the RMF landscapes, a reference geno-type was chosen as the sequence consisting of iden-tical alleles at all loci (e.g., the all-zero genotype). For each genotype g, the Hamming distance d(g, g ref )from the reference genotype gref was computed. The fitness of genotype g was then defined as 

f (g) = −c · d(g, g ref ) + η(g),

where c is a parameter controlling the slope of the additive fitness gradient, and η(g) is an independent random variable drawn from a standard normal dis-tribution. After computing raw fitness values for all genotypes, the landscape was linearly normalized to the interval [0 , 1] by subtracting the minimum fit-ness and dividing by the fitness range. To generate a landscape with similar number of peaks as the NK landscape, we chose c = 2. 

Alternating landscapes 

To generate the alternating landscapes, for each geno-type g, the Hamming distance d(g, g ref ) to the ref-erence genotype was computed. Fitness was then assigned as an alternating function of this distance, such that genotypes at even Hamming distances were assigned higher fitness values, while those at odd dis-tances were assigned lower fitness values. This re-sults in nearly maximally rugged landscapes, similar to the egg-box model (Ferretti et al., 2016) for a = 2 or the model used by Rosenberg (2005) for a > 2, but with some random fitness contribution added to each genotype. Specifically, for even distances, fitness was defined as a weakly decreasing function of distance with added Gaussian noise, 

f (g) = 1 − 0.1 · d(g, g ref ) + 0 .01 · η(g),

where η(g) ∼ N (0 , 1). For odd distances, fitness val-ues were assigned a lower baseline that decayed with distance, 

f (g) = 0.1

d(g, g ref ) + 1 + 0 .01 · η(g),

with η(g) ∼ N (0 , 1). Fitness values were truncated to ensure non-negativity and subsequently normalized by dividing by the maximum fitness value in the landscape, such that the global peak fitness was rescaled to 1. 

# 6B Computing the ruggedness mea-sures 

The ruggedness measures were computed as averages over 1000 independently generated landscapes of each type. 

Navigational ruggedness 

The Navigational ruggedness RN was computed by simulating N random adaptive walks (Kauffman and Levin, 1987) on the fitness landscape, by starting from uniformly sampled random genotypes. Using this, each peak was associated with an empirical probability of reaching the peak Preach (peak), pro-portional to the number of random walks that termi-nated at that peak. RN was then calculated as: 

RN = 1 − X

> peak

Preach (peak) F (peak) ,

where F (peak) is the fitness of the peak. Here, we used N = 5000. 18 Baseline ruggedness 

The Baseline ruggedness RB was computed by cal-culating the average fitness of all Npeaks peaks in the landscapes, i.e., ¯f = 1 

> Npeaks

· P 

> peak

F (peak) and sub-tracting that from 1, to estimate how far the average fitness is from the global peak fitness. 

Number of peaks 

Fitness peaks were identified implicitly through the random adaptive walks on the landscape. Peaks are defined as genotypes with no fitness-increasing muta-tions, and were thus detected as absorbing states of the random adaptive walk dynamics. 

Number of non-global peak basin genotypes 

A directed graph was constructed in which an edge from genotype g to genotype n exists if n is a single-mutant neighbor of g with higher fitness. This graph was subsequently reversed so that edges point from higher-fitness genotypes to lower-fitness ones. Then starting from the global peak, a depth-first search was performed on the reversed graph to identify all genotypes that can reach the peak through mono-tonic fitness-increasing paths in the original land-scape. The number of visited genotypes defines the size of the global peak basin. All remaining genotypes were classified as non-global-peak genotypes. 

# 7 Code availability 

Code used to produce Figure 2 is available here and will be archived on Zenodo after acceptance of the paper. 

# 8 Acknowledgments 

JK is grateful to Daniel Oros for useful discussions, and to the MPI for Evolutionary Biology in Pl¨ on for hospitality during the completion of the manuscript. During the preparation of this manuscript, the au-thors used the generative AI tools ChatGPT and Claude for aid in literature search. 

# 9 Funding 

JK acknowledges support by Deutsche Forschungs-gemeinschaft (DFG) within projects CRC 1310 Pre-dictability in evolution and TRR 341 Plant ecological genetics . SGD and CB are grateful for support from SNF Project Grant 320030-236379 from the Swiss National Science Foundation to CB. 

# 10 Conflicts of interest 

The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest. 

# References 

Alia Abbara and Anne-Florence Bitbol. Frequent asymmetric migrations suppress natural selection in spatially structured populations. PNAS nexus ,2(11):pgad392, 2023. Jos´ e Aguilar-Rodr´ ıguez, Joshua L Payne, and An-dreas Wagner. A thousand empirical adaptive landscapes and their navigability. Nature ecology & evolution , 1(2):0045, 2017. S. E. Ahnert. Structural properties of geno-type–phenotype maps. Journal of The Royal So-ciety Interface , 14(132):20170275, 07 2017. ISSN 1742-5689. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2017.0275. URL 

https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2017.0275 .Takuyo Aita, Hidefumi Uchiyama, Tetsuya Inaoka, Motowo Nakajima, Toshio Kokubo, and Yuzuru Husimi. Analysis of a local fitness landscape with a model of the rough Mt. Fuji-type landscape: ap-plication to prolyl endopeptidase and thermolysin. 

Biopolymers: Original Research on Biomolecules ,54(1):64–79, 2000. Andr´ e Amado and Claudia Bank. Ecological trade-offs lead to complex evolutionary trajectories and sustained diversity on dynamic fitness landscapes. 

Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoreti-cal , 57(19):195601, 2024. 19 Claudia Bank. Epistasis and adaptation on fitness landscapes. Annual review of ecology, evolution, and systematics , 53(1):457–479, 2022. Claudia Bank, Sebastian Matuszewski, Ryan T. Hietpas, and Jeffrey D. Jensen. On the (un)predictability of a large intragenic fitness land-scape. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA , 113(49):14085–14090, 2016. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1612676113. Graham Bell. Evolutionary rescue. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics , 48:605–627, 2017. Johannes Berg, Stana Willmann, and Michael L¨ assig. Adaptive evolution of transcription factor binding sites. BMC evolutionary biology , 4(1):42, 2004. Fran¸ cois Blanquart, Guillaume Achaz, Thomas Bataillon, and Olivier Tenaillon. Properties of se-lected mutations and genotypic landscapes under Fisher’s geometric model. Evolution , 68(12):3537– 3554, 2014. Alejandro V. Cano and Joshua L. Payne. Mutation bias interacts with composition bias to influence adaptive evolution. PLoS Computational Biology ,16(9):e1008296, 2020. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi. 1008296. Alejandro V. Cano, Hana Rozhoˇ nov´ a, Arlin Stoltz-fus, David M. McCandlish, and Joshua L. Payne. Mutation bias shapes the spectrum of adaptive substitutions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 119(6):e2119720119, 2022. doi: 10. 1073/pnas.2119720119. Maur´ ıcio Carneiro and Daniel L Hartl. Adaptive landscapes and protein evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 107(suppl 1): 1747–1751, 2010. Jerry A Coyne, Nicholas H Barton, and Michael Turelli. Perspective: a critique of Sewall Wright’s shifting balance theory of evolution. Evolution , 51 (3):643–671, 1997. Kristina Crona, Devin Greene, and Miriam Bar-low. The peaks and geometry of fitness landscapes. 

Journal of theoretical biology , 317:1–10, 2013. Kristina Crona, Joachim Krug, and Malvika Sri-vastava. Geometry of fitness landscapes: peaks, shapes and universal positive epistasis. Journal of Mathematical Biology , 86(4):62, 2023. Suman G. Das, Susana O. L. Direito, Bartlomiej Wa-claw, Rosalind J. Allen, and Joachim Krug. Pre-dictable properties of fitness landscapes induced by adaptational tradeoffs. eLife , 9:e55155, 2020. doi: 10.7554/eLife.55155. Suman G Das, Joachim Krug, and Muhittin Mungan. Driven disordered systems approach to biological evolution in changing environments. Physical Re-view X , 12(3):031040, 2022. Suman G Das, Muhittin Mungan, and Joachim Krug. Epistasis-mediated compensatory evolution in a fitness landscape with adaptational tradeoffs. Pro-ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 122 (15):e2422520122, 2025. J Arjan GM De Visser and Joachim Krug. Empirical fitness landscapes and the predictability of evolu-tion. Nature reviews genetics , 15(7):480–490, 2014. J Arjan GM De Visser, Su-Chan Park, and Joachim Krug. Exploring the effect of sex on empirical fitness landscapes. The American Naturalist , 174 (S1):S15–S30, 2009. Juan Diaz-Colunga, Abigail Skwara, Karna Gowda, Ramon Diaz-Uriarte, Mikhail Tikhonov, Djordje Bajic, and Alvaro Sanchez. Global epistasis on fit-ness landscapes. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences , 378(1877), 2023. Kamaludin Dingle, Fatme Ghaddar, Petr ˇSulc, and Ard A. Louis. Phenotype bias determines how natural rna structures occupy the morphospace of all possible shapes. Molecular Biology and Evolu-tion , 39(1):msab280, 2022. doi: 10.1093/molbev/ msab280. 20 J´ ulia Domingo, Pablo Baeza-Centurion, and Ben Lehner. The causes and consequences of genetic interactions (epistasis). Annual review of genomics and human genetics , 20(1):433–460, 2019. Luca Ferretti, Benjamin Schmiegelt, Daniel Weinre-ich, Atsushi Yamauchi, Yutaka Kobayashi, Fumio Tajima, and Guillaume Achaz. Measuring epista-sis in fitness landscapes: The correlation of fitness effects of mutations. Journal of theoretical biology ,396:132–143, 2016. Jasper Franke, Alexander Kl¨ ozer, J Arjan GM De Visser, and Joachim Krug. Evolutionary ac-cessibility of mutational pathways. PLoS computa-tional biology , 7(8):e1002134, 2011. John H Gillespie. Some properties of finite popula-tions experiencing strong selection and weak mu-tation. The American Naturalist , 121(5):691–708, 1983. John H Gillespie. Molecular evolution over the mu-tational landscape. Evolution , pages 1116–1129, 1984. Arne B. Gjuvsland, Jon Olav Vik, Daniel A. Beard, Peter J. Hunter, and Stig W. Omholt. Bridg-ing the genotype–phenotype gap: what does it take? The Journal of Physiology , 591(8):2055– 2066, 2013. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2012.248864. Sam F. Greenbury, Steffen Schaper, Sebastian E. Ahnert, and Ard A. Louis. Genetic correlations greatly increase mutational robustness and can both reduce and enhance evolvability. PLOS Com-putational Biology , 12(3):1–27, 03 2016. doi: 10. 1371/journal.pcbi.1004773. URL https://doi. org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004773 .Sam F. Greenbury, Ard A. Louis, and Sebastian E. Ahnert. The structure of genotype-phenotype maps makes fitness landscapes navigable. Nature Ecology & Evolution , 6(11):1742–1752, 2022. doi: 10.1038/s41559-022-01867-z. Yipei Guo, Marija Vucelja, and Ariel Amir. Stochas-tic tunneling across fitness valleys can give rise to a logarithmic long-term fitness trajectory. Science advances , 5(7):eaav3842, 2019. Loraine Habl¨ utzel, Ailene MacPherson, and Claudia Bank. Repeatability of adaptation in interacting species. bioRxiv , pages 2026–04, 2026. John Burdon Sanderson Haldane. A defense of bean-bag genetics. Perspectives in Biology and medicine ,7(3):343–360, 1964. Peter Hegarty and Anders Martinsson. On the exis-tence of accessible paths in various models of fitness landscapes. The Annals of Probability , 24:1375– 1395, 2014. Leticia Hernando, Alexander Mendiburu, and Jose A Lozano. Anatomy of the attraction basins: Break-ing with the intuition. Evolutionary computation ,27(3):435–466, 2019. Paulien Hogeweg. Toward a theory of multilevel evo-lution: long-term information integration shapes the mutational landscape and enhances evolvabil-ity. Evolutionary systems biology , pages 195–224, 2012. Kye E. Hunter et al. Using a simplified Rough Mount Fuji model to disentangle how multi-peaked fitness landscapes can be highly navi-gable. bioRxiv , 2026. doi: 10.64898/2026. 03.19.712707. URL https://www.biorxiv.org/ content/10.64898/2026.03.19.712707v1 .Sungmin Hwang, Su-Chan Park, and Joachim Krug. Genotypic complexity of Fisher’s geometric model. 

Genetics , 206(2):1049–1079, 2017. Sungmin Hwang, Benjamin Schmiegelt, Luca Fer-retti, and Joachim Krug. Universality classes of interaction structures for NK fitness land-scapes. Journal of Statistical Physics , 172(1):226– 278, 2018. Dmitry N Ivankov and Evgenii M Zorin. Sign epista-sis can be absent in multi-peaked landscapes with neutral mutations. Genome Biology and Evolution ,page evag024, 2026. 21 Yoh Iwasa, Franziska Michor, and Martin A Nowak. Stochastic tunnels in evolutionary dynamics. Ge-netics , 166(3):1571–1579, 2004. David S. Johnson, Christos H. Papadimitriou, and Mihalis Yannakakis. How easy is local search? 

Journal of Computer and System Sciences , 37(1): 79–100, 1988. doi: 10.1016/0022-0000(88)90046-3. Milo S Johnson, Gautam Reddy, and Michael M De-sai. Epistasis and evolution: recent advances and an outlook for prediction. BMC biology , 21(1):120, 2023. Iain G. Johnston, Kamaludin Dingle, Sam F. Green-bury, Chico Q. Camargo, Jonathan P. K. Doye, Sebastian E. Ahnert, and Ard A. Louis. Sym-metry and simplicity spontaneously emerge from the algorithmic nature of evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 119(11):e2113883119, 2022. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2113883119. Amitabh Joshi. The shifting balance theory of evo-lution. Resonance , 4(12):66–75, 1999. Stuart Kauffman and Simon Levin. Towards a gen-eral theory of adaptive walks on rugged landscapes. 

Journal of theoretical Biology , 128(1):11–45, 1987. Stuart A Kauffman. At home in the universe: The search for laws of self-organization and complexity .Oxford university press, 1995. Stuart A Kauffman and Sonke Johnsen. Coevolution to the edge of chaos: coupled fitness landscapes, poised states, and coevolutionary avalanches. Jour-nal of theoretical biology , 149(4):467–505, 1991. Stuart A Kauffman and Edward D Weinberger. The NK model of rugged fitness landscapes and its application to maturation of the immune re-sponse. Journal of theoretical biology , 141(2):211– 245, 1989. Artem Kaznatcheev. Computational complexity as an ultimate constraint on evolution. Genetics , 212 (1):245–265, 2019. Artem Kaznatcheev and Sofia Vazquez Alferez. When is local search both effective and efficient? 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02634 , 2024. Eshan S King, Anna E Stacy, Davis T Weaver, Jeff Maltas, Rowan Barker-Clarke, Emily Dolson, and Jacob G Scott. Fitness seascapes are necessary for realistic modeling of the evolutionary response to drug therapy. Science Advances , 11(24):eadv1268, 2025. Mark Kirkpatrick and Nick Barton. Chromosome in-versions, local adaptation and speciation. Genet-ics , 173(1):419–434, 2006. Joachim Krug and Daniel Oros. Evolutionary accessi-bility of random and structured fitness landscapes. 

Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Ex-periment , 2024(3):034003, 2024. Daniel J Kvitek and Gavin Sherlock. Reciprocal sign epistasis between frequently experimentally evolved adaptive mutations causes a rugged fitness landscape. PLoS genetics , 7(4):e1002056, 2011. Francesca-Zhoufan Li, Jason Yang, Kadina E John-ston, Emre G¨ ursoy, Yisong Yue, and Frances H Arnold. Evaluation of machine learning-assisted di-rected evolution across diverse combinatorial land-scapes. Cell Systems , 16(9), 2025. Juan Li and Claudia Bank. Dominance and multi-locus interaction. Trends in Genetics , 40(4):364– 378, 2024. Juan Li, Andr´ e Amado, and Claudia Bank. Rapid adaptation of recombining populations on tun-able fitness landscapes. Molecular ecology , 33(10): e16900, 2024. Y. Li and Jianzhi Zhang. On the probability of reaching high peaks in fitness landscapes by adap-tive walks. Molecular Biology and Evolution , 42: msaf066, 2025. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaf066. Ard A. Louis. Contemporary evolution of genotype– phenotype maps. Journal of The Royal Society In-terface , 13(122):20160237, 2016. doi: 10.1098/rsif. 2016.0237. 22 Ram P. Maharjan and Thomas Ferenci. Epistatic interactions determine evolutionary trajectories in chemostat populations. Evolution , 67(10):2864– 2876, 2013. doi: 10.1111/evo.12137. Akshat Mall, Christopher J Marx, and Jeremy A Draghi. Epigenetic variation can promote adapta-tion by smoothing rugged fitness landscapes. Pro-ceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sci-ences , 293(2064), 2026. James S. Malone, Nora S. Martin, Samuel H. A. von der Dunk, Liliana M. D´ avalos, and Ard A. Louis. Developmental bias explains the evolution-ary trend towards simple leaf shapes. bioRxiv ,2025. doi: 10.1101/2025.08.17.670617. URL 

https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.17.670617 .Michael Manhart, Allan Haldane, and Alexandre V Morozov. A universal scaling law determines time reversibility and steady state of substitutions under selection. Theoretical Population Biology , 82(1): 66–76, 2011. Swathi Nachiar Manivannan and C Brandon Og-bunugafor. Deconstructing empirical fitness seascapes across scales of granularity. bioRxiv ,pages 2026–02, 2026. Susanna Manrubia and Jos´ e A Cuesta. Distribution of genotype network sizes in sequence-to-structure genotype–phenotype maps. Journal of The Royal Society Interface , 14(129):20160976, 2017. Susanna Manrubia, Jos´ e A Cuesta, Jacobo Aguirre, Sebastian E Ahnert, Lee Altenberg, Alejandro V Cano, Pablo Catal´ an, Ramon Diaz-Uriarte, San-tiago F Elena, Juan Antonio Garc´ ıa-Mart´ ın, et al. From genotypes to organisms: State-of-the-art and perspectives of a cornerstone in evolutionary dy-namics. Physics of Life Reviews , 38:55–106, 2021a. Susanna Manrubia, Jos´ e A. Cuesta, Jacobo Aguirre, Sebastian E. Ahnert, Lee Altenberg, Alejan-dro V. Cano, Pablo Catal´ an, Ramon Diaz-Uriarte, Santiago F. Elena, Juan Antonio Garc´ ıa-Mart´ ın, Paulien Hogeweg, Bhavin S. Khatri, Joachim Krug, Ard A. Louis, Nora S. Mar-tin, Joshua L. Payne, Matthew J. Tarnowski, and Marcel Weiß. From genotypes to organ-isms: State-of-the-art and perspectives of a cor-nerstone in evolutionary dynamics. Physics of Life Reviews , 38:55–106, 2021b. ISSN 1571-0645. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2021. 03.004. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/ science/article/pii/S1571064521000300 .Susanna C. Manrubia and Jos´ e A. Cuesta. Evolution on neutral networks accelerates the ticking rate of the molecular clock. Journal of the Royal Society Interface , 12(113):20141010, 2015. doi: 10.1098/ rsif.2014.1010. Nora S. Martin and Sebastian E. Ahnert. Insertions and deletions in the RNA sequence–structure map. 

Journal of The Royal Society Interface , 18(183): 20210380, 2021. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2021.0380. Nora S. Martin, Chico Q. Camargo, and Ard A. Louis. Bias in the arrival of variation can dom-inate over natural selection in richard dawkins’s biomorphs. PLOS Computational Biology , 20 (3):e1011893, 2024. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi. 1011893. Jiˇ r´ ı Matouˇ sek and Tibor Szab´ o. Random edge can be exponential on abstract cubes. Advances in Math-ematics , 204(1):262–277, 2006. David M McCandlish. On the findability of geno-types. Evolution , 67(9):2592–2603, 2013. David M McCandlish and Arlin Stoltzfus. Modeling evolution using the probability of fixation: history and implications. The Quarterly review of biology ,89(3):225–252, 2014. David M McCandlish, Charles L Epstein, and Joshua B Plotkin. The inevitability of uncondi-tionally deleterious substitutions during adapta-tion. Evolution , 68(5):1351–1364, 2014. Portia M Mira, Juan C Meza, Anna Nandipati, and Miriam Barlow. Adaptive landscapes of resistance genes change as antibiotic concentrations change. 

Molecular biology and evolution , 32(10):2707–2715, 2015. 23 Charles Mullon. Evolutionary game theory and the adaptive dynamics approach: adaptation where individuals interact. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences , 375 (1809):20190377, 2020. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2019. 0377. Ville Mustonen and Michael L¨ assig. From fitness landscapes to seascapes: non-equilibrium dynam-ics of selection and adaptation. Trends in genetics ,25(3):111–119, 2009. Johannes Neidhart, Ivan G Szendro, and Joachim Krug. Adaptation in tunably rugged fitness land-scapes: The Rough Mount Fuji model. Genet-ics , 198(2):699–721, 08 2014. ISSN 1943-2631. doi: 10.1534/genetics.114.167668. URL https: //doi.org/10.1534/genetics.114.167668 .Koichiro K. Nishikawa, Mustafa Acar, and David A. Liberles. Epistasis shapes the fitness landscape of an allosteric protein. Nature Communications , 12: 6147, 2021. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-25826-7. Stefan Nowak, Johannes Neidhart, Ivan G Szendro, and Joachim Krug. Multidimensional epistasis and the transitory advantage of sex. PLoS computa-tional biology , 10(9):e1003836, 2014. C Brandon Ogbunugafor, C Scott Wylie, Ibrahim Di-akite, Daniel M Weinreich, and Daniel L Hartl. Adaptive landscape by environment interactions dictate evolutionary dynamics in models of drug resistance. PLoS computational biology , 12(1): e1004710, 2016. Daniel Oros and Joachim Krug. Random fitness land-scapes are highly navigable. In preparation, 2026. H Allen Orr. The population genetics of adaptation: the adaptation of DNA sequences. Evolution , 56 (7):1317–1330, 2002. H Allen Orr. A minimum on the mean number of steps taken in adaptive walks. Journal of Theoret-ical Biology , 220(2):241–247, 2003. Sakshi Pahujani and Joachim Krug. Complexity and accessibility of random landscapes. SciPost Physics Lecture Notes , page 108, 2025. Andrei Papkou, Laura Garcia-Pastor, Juan A. Es-cudero, and Andreas Wagner. A rugged yet easily navigable fitness landscape. Science , 382:eadh3860, 2023. doi: 10.1126/science.adh3860. Su-Chan Park and Joachim Krug. Bistability in two-locus models with selection, mutation, and recom-bination. Journal of mathematical biology , 62(5): 763–788, 2011. Patrick C Phillips. Epistasis—the essential role of gene interactions in the structure and evolution of genetic systems. Nature Reviews Genetics , 9(11): 855–867, 2008. Massimo Pigliucci. Genotype–phenotype mapping and the end of the ‘genes as blueprint’ metaphor. 

Philosophy & Theory in Biology , 2:e103, 2010. Frank J Poelwijk, Daniel J Kiviet, Daniel M Wein-reich, and Sander J Tans. Empirical fitness land-scapes reveal accessible evolutionary paths. Na-ture , 445(7126):383–386, 2007. Frank J Poelwijk, Sorin T˘ anase-Nicola, Daniel JKiviet, and Sander J Tans. Reciprocal sign epista-sis is a necessary condition for multi-peaked fitness landscapes. Journal of theoretical biology , 272(1): 141–144, 2011. Frank J Poelwijk, Vinod Krishna, and Rama Ran-ganathan. The context-dependence of mutations: a linkage of formalisms. PLoS computational biol-ogy , 12(6):e1004771, 2016. Sandro M Reia and Paulo RA Campos. Analysis of statistical correlations between properties of adap-tive walks in fitness landscapes. Royal Society Open Science , 7(1), 2020. Hendrik Richter and Andries Engelbrecht. Recent ad-vances in the theory and application of fitness land-scapes , volume 6. Springer, 2014. Manda Riehl, Reed Phillips, Lara Pudwell, and Nate Chenette. Occurrences of reciprocal sign epistasis in single-and multi-peaked theoretical fitness land-scapes. Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical , 55(43):434002, 2022. 24 Noah A. Rosenberg. A sharp minimum on the mean number of steps taken in adaptive walks. Journal of Theoretical Biology , 237:17–22, 2005. doi: 10.1016/ j.jtbi.2005.03.026. URL https://rosenberglab. stanford.edu/papers/adaptive.pdf .Hana Rozhoˇ nov´ a, Carlos Mart´ ı-G´ omez, David M. McCandlish, and Joshua L. Payne. Robust genetic codes enhance protein evolvability. PLoS Biology ,22(5):e3002594, 2024. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio. 3002594. Merijn LM Salverda, Eynat Dellus, Florien AGorter, Alfons JM Debets, John Van Der Oost, Rolf F Hoekstra, Dan S Tawfik, and J Arjan GM de Visser. Initial mutations direct alternative path-ways of protein evolution. PLoS genetics , 7(3): e1001321, 2011. Raimundo Saona, Fyodor A Kondrashov, and Kse-nia A Khudiakova. Relation between the number of peaks and the number of reciprocal sign epistatic interactions. Bulletin of Mathematical Biology , 84 (8):74, 2022. Alejandro A. Sch¨ affer and Mihalis Yannakakis. Sim-ple local search problems that are hard to solve. 

SIAM Journal on Computing , 20(1):56–87, 1991. doi: 10.1137/0220004. Steffen Schaper and Ard A. Louis. The arrival of the frequent: How bias in genotype–phenotype maps can steer populations to local optima. PLoS ONE , 9(2):e86635, 2014. doi: 10.1371/journal. pone.0086635. Steffen Schaper, Ian G. Johnston, and Ard A. Louis. Epistasis can lead to fragmented neutral spaces and contingency in evolution. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences , 279(1734): 1777–1783, 2012. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2011.2266. Martijn F Schenk, Ivan G Szendro, Merijn LM Salverda, Joachim Krug, and J Arjan GM De Visser. Patterns of epistasis between beneficial mutations in an antibiotic resistance gene. Molec-ular biology and evolution , 30(8):1779–1787, 2013. Benjamin Schmiegelt and Joachim Krug. Accessibil-ity percolation on Cartesian power graphs. Jour-nal of Mathematical Biology , 86(3):46, 2023. doi: 10.1007/s00285-023-01882-z. Guy Sella and Aaron E. Hirsh. The application of sta-tistical physics to evolutionary biology. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA , 102(27): 9541–9546, 2005. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0501865102. Victor Servajean and Anne-Florence Bitbol. Impact of population size on early adaptation in rugged fit-ness landscapes. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B , 378(1877):20220043, 2023. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2022.0043. Victor Servajean, Anne-Florence Bitbol, et al. Im-pact of complex spatial population structure on early and long-term adaptation on rugged fitness landscapes. Evolution , 79(6):935–949, 2025. doi: 10.1093/evolut/qpad050. Malvika Srivastava. Adaptive Landscapes Across Mul-tiple Scales . PhD thesis, ETH Zurich, 2024. Malvika Srivastava, Hana Rozhoˇ nov´ a, and Joshua L. Payne. Alphabet cardinality and adaptive evolu-tion. Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and The-oretical , 56:455601, 2023. doi: 10.1088/1751-8121/ ad0200. Malvika Srivastava, Ard A Louis, and Nora S Mar-tin. Predicting the topography of fitness land-scapes from the structure of genotype-phenotype maps. Genetics , page iyag026, 02 2026. ISSN 1943-2631. doi: 10.1093/genetics/iyag026. URL 

https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyag026 .B¨ arbel MR Stadler and Peter F Stadler. Combinato-rial vector fields and the valley structure of fitness landscapes. Journal of mathematical biology , 61 (6):877–898, 2010. Peter F Stadler. Fitness landscapes. In Michael L¨ assig and Angelo Valleriani, editors, Biological evolution and statistical physics , pages 183–204. Springer, 2002. 25 Peter F Stadler. Towards a theory of landscapes. In R. Lopez-Pe˜ na, H. Waelbroeck, R. Capovilla, R. Garc´ ıa-Pelayo, and F. Zertuche, editors, Com-plex systems and binary networks: Guanajuato lec-tures held at Guanajuato, M´ exico 16–22 January 1995 , pages 78–163. Springer, 2007. Peter F Stadler and Robert Happel. Random field models for fitness landscapes. Journal of Mathe-matical Biology , 38(5):435–478, 1999. DL Stein, editor. Spin Glasses and Biology . Singa-pore: World Scientific, 1992. Erik I Svensson and Ryan Calsbeek. The adaptive landscape in evolutionary biology . Oxford Univer-sity Press, 2012. Ivan G Szendro, Jasper Franke, J Arjan GM de Visser, and Joachim Krug. Predictability of evolution depends nonmonotonically on population size. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-ences , 110(2):571–576, 2013a. Ivan G Szendro, Martijn F Schenk, Jasper Franke, Joachim Krug, and J Arjan GM De Visser. Quan-titative analyses of empirical fitness landscapes. 

Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Ex-periment , 2013(01):P01005, 2013b. Danielle M Tufts, Chandrasekhar Natarajan, Inge G Revsbech, Joana Projecto-Garcia, Federico G Hoff-mann, Roy E Weber, Angela Fago, Hideaki Moriyama, and Jay F Storz. Epistasis constrains mutational pathways of hemoglobin adaptation in high-altitude pikas. Molecular biology and evolu-tion , 32(2):287–298, 2015. Hildegard Uecker, Matthew Osmond, Carla Ale-jandre, Ernesto Barrios-Caro, Dale Clement, Pe-ter Czuppon, L´ eonard Dekens, Puneeth Deraje, Jeremy Draghi, Asad Hasan, et al. Modeling evo-lutionary rescue. EcoEvoRxiv , 2026. Erik van Nimwegen and James P. Crutchfield. Metastable evolutionary dynamics: Crossing fit-ness barriers or escaping via neutral paths? Tech-nical Report 99-07-041, Santa Fe Institute, 1999. Working paper. Andreas Wagner. Robustness and evolvability: aparadox resolved. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences , 275(1630):91–100, 2008. Bruce Walsh and Michael Lynch. Evolution and selec-tion of quantitative traits . Oxford University Press, 2018. Richard A Watson, Daniel M Weinreich, and John Wakeley. Genome structure and the benefit of sex. 

Evolution , 65(2):523–536, 2011. Daniel M Weinreich and Lin Chao. Rapid evolution-ary escape by large populations from local fitness peaks is likely in nature. Evolution , 59(6):1175– 1182, 2005. Daniel M Weinreich, Richard A Watson, and Lin Chao. Perspective: sign epistasis and genetic cos-traint on evolutionary trajectories. Evolution , 59 (6):1165–1174, 2005. Daniel M Weinreich, Nigel F Delaney, Mark A De-Pristo, and Daniel L Hartl. Darwinian evolution can follow only very few mutational paths to fitter proteins. science , 312(5770):111–114, 2006. Daniel B Weissman, Michael M Desai, Daniel SFisher, and Marcus W Feldman. The rate at which asexual populations cross fitness valleys. Theoret-ical population biology , 75(4):286–300, 2009. Cau˜ a Antunes Westmann, Leander Goldbach, and Andreas Wagner. The adaptive landscapes of three global Escherichia coli transcriptional regulators. 

bioRxiv , pages 2024–11, 2024a. Cau˜ a Antunes Westmann, Leander Goldbach, and Andreas Wagner. The highly rugged yet navigable regulatory landscape of the bacterial transcription factor TetR. Nature Communications , 15(1):10745, 2024b. S. Wright. The roles of mutation, inbreeding, cross-breeding and selection in evolution. Proceedings of the XI International Congress of Genetics , 8:209– 222, 1932. 26 Sewall Wright. The shifting balance theory and macroevolution. Annual Review of Genetics , 16: 1–19, 1982. doi: 10.1146/annurev.ge.16.120182. 000245. Nicholas C. Wu, Lihong Dai, Charles A. Olson, James O. Lloyd-Smith, and Ren Sun. Adap-tation in protein fitness landscapes is facilitated by indirect paths. eLife , 5:e16965, 2016. doi: 10.7554/eLife.16965. Marcin Zagorski, Zdzislaw Burda, and Bartlomiej Waclaw. Beyond the hypercube: Evolutionary ac-cessibility of fitness landscapes with realistic mu-tational networks. PLoS Computational Biology ,12(12):e1005218, 2016. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi. 1005218. 27