Title: Lessons and Open Questions from a Unified Study of Camera-Trap Species Recognition Over Time

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.20509v1

Published Time: Tue, 24 Mar 2026 00:23:22 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
# Lessons and Open Questions from a Unified Study of Camera-Trap Species Recognition Over Time 

## Sooyoung Jeon *1 Hongjie Tian *1 Lemeng Wang *1 Zheda Mai †1 Vidhi Bakshi 1

## Jiacheng Hou 1 Ping Zhang 1 Arpita Chowdhury 1 Jianyang Gu 1 Wei-Lun Chao 21The Ohio State University 2Boston University 

width=0.9 height=0.9 Changing Season 

> Time Span

Changing Weather 

Changing Animals 

(a)    

> Interval 1 Interval 3 Interval 5 Interval 7

(b) 

Figure 1. (a). Temporal shifts: even at a fixed site, foreground and background appearances evolve over time due to changing seasons, weather, and animal distribution. (b). Streaming evaluation: accumulated ⋆ model is fine-tuned with training data up to the current interval and evaluated on the test data of the next interval. For reference, an oracle ⋆ model is fine-tuned with the union of training data from all time intervals at a site and evaluated on the test data of all intervals. ( ⋆: our recipe Sec. 4.4). 

## Abstract 

Camera traps are crucial for large-scale biodiversity mon-itoring, yet accurate automated analysis remains challeng-ing due to diverse deployment environments. While the computer vision community has predominantly framed this challenge as cross-domain ( e.g ., cross-site) generalization, this perspective overlooks a primary challenge faced by ecological practitioners: maintaining reliable recognition at the fixed site over time , where the dynamic nature of ecosystems introduces profound temporal shifts in both background and animal distributions. To bridge this gap, we present the first unified study of camera-trap species recognition over time . We introduce a realistic, large-scale benchmark comprising 546 camera traps with a stream-ing protocol that evaluates models over chronologically ordered intervals. Our end-user-centric study yields four key findings. (1) Biological foundation models ( e.g ., Bio-

> *Equal contribution.
> †Corresponding author.

CLIP 2) underperform at numerous sites even in initial in-tervals, underscoring the necessity of site-specific adapta-tion. (2) Adaptation is challenging under realistic evalua-tion: when models are updated using past data and eval-uated on future intervals (mirrors real deployment lifecy-cles), naive adaptation can even degrade below zero-shot performance. (3) We identify two main drivers of this dif-ficulty: severe class imbalance and pronounced temporal shift in both species distribution and backgrounds between consecutive intervals. (4) We find that effective integration of model-update and post-processing techniques can largely improve accuracy, though a gap from the upper bounds re-mains. Finally, we highlight critical open questions, such as predicting when zero-shot models will succeed at a new site and determining whether/when model updates are nec-essary. Together, our benchmark and analysis provide ac-tionable deployment guidelines for ecological practitioners while establishing new directions for future research in vi-sion and machine learning. Training code and dataset are 

1

> arXiv:2603.20509v1 [cs.CV] 20 Mar 2026

available at: https://jeonso0907.github.io/stream-trap/ 

## 1. Introduction 

Camera traps are vital tools for ecology and conserva-tion: they non-invasively capture large volumes of time-stamped images in natural habitats, supporting biodiver-sity monitoring, behavior analysis, and conservation plan-ning [36, 50]. Yet ecosystems are inherently non-stationary: seasonal shifts, weather changes, vegetation growth, and animal migration constantly reshape backgrounds and an-imal distributions (Fig. 1a). Such dynamic conditions intro-duce substantial visual variability, posing unique challenges for vision models [8, 26]. Prior studies often frame the problem as domain adap-tation or generalization, aiming to transfer models trained on source domains ( e.g ., specific cameras or time periods) to unseen target domains [41, 61]. While this perspective casts camera trap data as a crucial testbed for machine learn-ing robustness, it diverges from the practical needs of end-users ( e.g ., ecologists and conservation practitioners). Their dominant interest is not a model’s ranking on cross-domain leaderboards, but its ability to maintain high accuracy at a specific deployment site as dynamically changing data arrives . Recognizing that this practical problem remains largely underexplored, we conduct a unified and compre-hensive study of camera trap species recognition over time , reformulating the evaluation to faithfully mirror the temporal lifecycle of real-world deployments. To facilitate this study, we introduce a realistic camera trap benchmark S TREAM TRAP with a streaming evaluation protocol where models are evaluated as new data arrives and are incrementally updated thereafter. For each camera trap, the image stream is partitioned into consecutive time in-tervals for evaluating models chronologically. Concretely, at each interval j, a model can access cumulative, labeled training data from all intervals up to the j-th interval, un-dergo parameter updates, and evaluate on the unseen test data from the subsequent (j + 1) -th interval. To construct STREAM TRAP , we curate data from the LILA BC repos-itory [1], identifying 546 camera traps from 17 datasets, each with sufficient data spanning at least 6 months. Also, we provide a modular, reproducible data pipeline that ad-heres to FAIR principles (Findable, Accessible, Interoper-able, and Reusable), enabling practitioners to seamlessly convert their raw ecological data into standardized temporal benchmarks. Building on S TREAM TRAP , we conduct a unified end-user-centric study aiming to answer common questions faced by ecological practitioners, and distill actionable guidelines for maintaining accurate models in dynamic en-vironments. We summarize our key analyses as follows: 

Adaptation is required even with biological foundation models. End-users often face this question before deploy-ment, especially when biological vision foundation mod-els [19, 45] already achieve state-of-the-art zero-shot accu-racy across various biodiversity datasets, including subsets of the LILA BC repository. We observe significant variabil-ity in BioCLIP 2’s zero-shot accuracy across 546 camera traps in S TREAM TRAP : while 161 exceed 90% accuracy, demonstrating the immense promise of these models, an-other 162 fall in the 50–80% range, indicating a persistent, critical need for site-specific adaptation. 

Adaptation is challenging in the real world. When off-the-shelf foundation models underperform, fine-tuning is a natural first adaptation choice. However, adaptation becomes more challenging than standard in-domain fine-tuning in the realistic streaming evaluation of S TREAM -TRAP where a model updated on data up to the current inter-val is evaluated on the future interval. Surprisingly, we find that naively supervised fine-tuning of a model (we term the 

accumulated model ) using all data observed so far can de-grade performance, often causing it to fall below the base-line zero-shot accuracy. Our investigation identifies two primary drivers behind this adaptation failure. First, because camera traps ac-quire images passively and must “wait” for animals to ap-pear, some species may not be observed within an inter-val. Thus, the training data available for an interval is often extremely low-shot and severely imbalanced, causing poor generalization during naive adaptation [49]. Second, due to the inherent non-stationarity of ecosystems, both the back-ground context and the animal population distributions un-dergo profound shifts between consecutive intervals. As a result, a model that achieves high accuracy on current and past intervals is not guaranteed to maintain that performance when faced with the shifted distributions of future intervals. 

Practical recipes for robust adaptation. To combat the low-shot and imbalance issues, we evaluate a suite of prac-tical techniques and find that combining parameter-efficient fine-tuning [31] and class-imbalance losses [38, 56] is a ro-bust solution to improve generalization in camera trap vi-sion model adaptation. However, even with this optimized recipe, the continually adapted models still exhibit a non-negligible performance gap (Fig. 1b) compared to an up-per bound ( oracle ⋆ model fine-tuned with all training data across all time intervals at a site). To address the inter-interval distribution shifts and close this gap, we identify three post-processing techniques: post-hoc logit calibra-tion [30], weight interpolation [54], and interval model se-lection. 

More practical considerations. Accurate real-world de-ployment involves more than choosing an adaptation algo-rithm. Through discussions with end-users, we identify crit-ical, practical questions frequently overlooked by the vision community: How can practitioners predict if a foundation 

2model’s zero-shot performance will be sufficient at a new, unseen site? If not, must we update at every interval to remain accurate, or is there an effective mechanism to de-termine when adapting at a given interval is actually nec-essary? As these questions are largely underexplored, we provide preliminary analyses and baseline solutions. 

Contributions. We present the first unified study of camera trap species recognition over time that reflects the tempo-ral lifecycle of ecological monitoring. We systematically analyze critical deployment questions, providing actionable guidance on what works while urging the computer vision community to tackle the remaining open challenges. Our work serves two primary audiences: • End-users : (1) our analyses provide actionable guidance for leveraging foundation models and adaptation tech-niques for reliable camera-trap analysis; (2) our FAIR-compliant data preparation pipeline enables practitioners to seamlessly convert their raw ecological data into stan-dardized benchmarks. • Algorithm developers : (1) we transform the LILA BC repository (historically challenging for developers to ac-cess) into a standardized benchmark designed for eval-uating robust adaptive models in the real world; (2) we identify critical, overlooked challenges about what ,

how , and when to update models under field constraints (e.g ., scarce or imbalanced data, non-stationary streams). By steering development toward these practitioner-driven questions, we aim to accelerate progress in this vital sci-entific application area. 

## 2. Related Work 

Camera trap data in computer vision. Camera traps have become essential tools for biodiversity monitoring, captur-ing vast volumes of wildlife images that provide insights into species richness and behavior [10, 48]. To automate analysis, deep learning methods have been widely adopted for species detection and classification [34, 59]. A major challenge is generalization: models trained on one loca-tion often perform poorly when deployed elsewhere. The iWildCam challenges [7, 8] address this by splitting data by camera location to assess out-of-distribution generaliza-tion [26, 30]. More recently, multimodal foundation mod-els have been applied to camera trap data for richer contex-tual understanding [15, 17]. However, the temporal dynam-ics—e.g., seasonal shifts and animal migration—remain un-derexplored [49]. Our benchmark incorporates temporal variability to better reflect real-world deployments. 

Continual learning (CL). CL studies how a model learns from a non-stationary data stream while retaining acquired knowledge and improving over time without catastrophic forgetting. This paradigm is closely related to our stream-ing evaluation protocol. However, traditional CL often as-sumes limited or no access to past data due to privacy or other constraints. In contrast, ecological deployments treat labeled camera trap data as a precious, persistent resource that is archived and fully accessible. To isolate temporal shift effects and avoid conflating them with artificial storage constraints, our baseline approach adopts what is typically considered an upper bound in CL: joint training on all his-torically available data at each interval. That said, while STREAM TRAP is explicitly tailored for studying wildlife monitoring under temporal shifts, its chronologically or-dered data streams and severe, natural distribution shifts inherently provide a challenging real-world testbed for the broader continual learning community [29]. 

Class imbalanced learning. Camera trap datasets often follow a long-tailed distribution, where models perform well on the majority species but poorly on rare ones [9, 32]. As rare species are often of greatest ecological interest, ad-dressing this imbalance is critical. Solutions fall into data-level and algorithm-level methods [40, 60]. We focus on simple but effective methods, such as the BSM loss [38] in our study. We provide detailed related work in Sec. A. 

## 3. S TREAM TRAP : Benchmarking Real-World Camera Trap Deployment with Streaming Evaluation Protocol 

Motivation. Camera traps are central to ecology and con-servation: they non-invasively capture massive streams of time-stamped images in natural habitats, enabling biodiver-sity monitoring, behavior analysis, and conservation plan-ning [36, 50]. Yet the environments are inherently non-stationary: seasons, weather, vegetation, and migration con-tinually reshape both the backgrounds and species distribu-tions (Fig. 1a), creating persistent visual shifts for deployed vision models. Prior work typically frames this challenge as domain adaptation/generalization, focusing on transferring models from source to target domains [41, 61]. However, this framing mismatches what end-users really need. End-users do not prioritize static cross-domain leaderboards; in-stead, their dominant interest is a model’s ability to main-tain high accuracy at a specific deployment site over time as dynamically changing data arrives .Yet a benchmark that truly mirrors how camera-trap data arrives in the wild and captures the temporal lifecycle of de-ployments remains missing. To close this gap and refocus the community on deployment-critical evaluation, we intro-duce S TREAM TRAP , a benchmark for camera trap species recognition over time with a streaming evaluation. By shift-ing the research focus from static domain transfer to site-level reliability, S TREAM TRAP encourages the community to develop adaptive systems that deliver durable value in the field. 

Streaming evaluation protocol. Unlike conventional do-main adaptation, where data from the target domain is avail-3Figure 2. Streaming evaluation protocol. 

able all at once [18, 44], S TREAM TRAP adopts a realistic streaming evaluation that better reflects real camera-trap de-ployment: models are evaluated as new data arrives and are incrementally updated thereafter. Given time-stamped im-ages from a camera trap, {(xi, y i, t i)}, where xi denotes the i-th image, yi its label, and ti its timestamp, we partition the stream into a sequence of chronological intervals. At in-terval j, a model may access the cumulative labeled training data from all intervals up to the j-th interval, update its pa-rameters, and is then evaluated on unseen test data from the subsequent (j +1) -th interval. See Fig. 2 for an illustration. Also, while S TREAM TRAP is tailored for camera traps under temporal shift, its streaming formulation also serves as an excellent, highly challenging testbed for broader ma-chine learning paradigms, such as online continual learn-ing [29]. 

3.1. Benchmark Construction and Statistics 

Data source. We build S TREAM TRAP on the LILA BC repository [1] with 17 camera-trap datasets ( e.g ., Snapshot Serengeti) comprising hundreds of camera traps deployed across continents. Here, a camera trap refers to a station-ary camera installed at a fixed location to passively monitor wildlife activity. 

FAIR processing pipeline. We focus on camera traps with sufficient temporal coverage and image volume to support streaming evaluation. We first partition each camera-trap stream into 30-day intervals; if an interval contains fewer than 200 images, we merge it with adjacent intervals to en-sure adequate data for both training and evaluation. Within each interval, we split data into training and test subsets, constructing the test split to be class-balanced . Categories with fewer than 10 samples in an interval are held out as rare species to maintain evaluation stability: they are separately evaluated and analyzed in the Sec. C. To remain focused on the temporal shift problem, we follow the LILA BC pro-tocol and apply MegaDetector [4] to extract image patches around detected animal instances. We enlarge each bound-ing box by 50% to preserve background context.    

> Figure 3. STREAM TRAP statistics. Top row: histograms of the image, class, and time span; Bottom row: histograms of temporal shift (TCDS, defined in Sec. 4.3) and class imbalance metrics (de-fined in Sec. 3.1).

To promote the FAIR principles (Findable, Accessi-ble, Interoperable, and Reusable) and empower future re-searchers to convert their raw ecological data into standard-ized benchmarks, we establish a modular data processing pipeline. Concretely, we preprocess each camera trap to ensure the availability of essential metadata (timestamps, image-level species labels, and animal bounding boxes) and apply two main filtering steps: 1. Single-species filtering: retain images containing a sin-gle species (and no humans or vehicles) so that image-level labels can be unambiguously assigned to detected instances (removes < 2% of images); 2. Detection filtering: retain images with at least one de-tected animal bounding box with confidence > 0.8 to ensure correctness of the bounding box. After filtering, we retain camera traps with more than 1,000 images and span a range of at least 6 months. Additional de-tails, including design choices, preprocessing and pipeline steps, MegaDetector robustness checks, and the list of cam-era traps included, are provided in Sec. D. 

Basic statistics Our rigorous processing pipeline yielded 546 valid camera traps. A summary of statistics ( e.g ., image and species histogram) is provided in Fig. 3. To quantify class imbalance for a camera-trap, we report two comple-mentary metrics: (i) the fraction of images belonging to the two most frequent classes, and (ii) the number of images in the least frequent classes. 

## 4. A Unified End-User-Centric Study 

Building on S TREAM TRAP , we conduct the first unified 

end-user-centric study to answer common questions faced by practitioners during deployment, and distill actionable guidelines for maintaining accurate models in dynamic en-vironments. 

Setting and model. For each camera trap, the model is initialized with the recently released BioCLIP 2 [19], a bi-ological vision foundation model trained on biological data and capable of classifying over 800 K species. To isolate the temporal dynamics we try to investigate, we assume 4C1 C2 C3 C4 C5 C6 C7 C8 C9 C10 C11 C12 C13 C14 C15 C16 C17 C18 C19 C20 Avg. ZS 94.1 97.7 81.3 94.5 75.8 81.5 85.6 80.1 81.2 62.7 79.3 75.3 69.5 87.2 82.6 76.5 92.3 77.9 80.2 82.1 81.9 Accum 63.2 73.6 56.0 72.9 57.0 50.0 75.7 60.0 73.0 60.6 76.0 66.0 66.0 75.1 68.0 68.0 77.1 73.0 74.0 72.0 67.9                                                             

> ∆30.9 24.1 25.3 21.6 18.8 31.5 9.9 20.1 8.2 2.1 3.3 9.3 3.5 12.1 14.6 8.5 15.2 4.9 6.2 10.1 –Accum ⋆98.0 98.7 79.6 94.7 76.9 69.7 94.5 75.9 88.3 75.4 90.7 80.0 79.6 88.2 81.0 80.9 89.9 84.9 85.4 83.0 84.8
> ∆3.9 1.0 1.7 0.2 1.1 11.8 8.9 4.2 7.1 14.7 11.4 4.7 10.1 1.0 1.6 4.4 2.4 7.0 5.2 0.9 –Oracle ⋆96.1 98.7 84.9 96.5 84.3 82.2 90.0 81.6 91.0 89.7 92.1 82.4 78.7 90.3 87.8 87.0 96.4 91.6 87.8 86.8 88.8
> ∆2.0 1.0 3.6 2.0 8.5 0.7 4.4 1.5 9.8 27.0 12.8 7.1 9.2 3.1 5.2 10.5 4.1 13.7 7.6 4.7 –
> Table 1. Accuracy difference ( ∆) between accumulated (Accum) and oracle models against zero-shot (ZS). Blue (red) denotes improvement (degradation) relative to ZS. ⋆: our adaptation recipe (Sec. 4.4)

the candidate set of species expected at each camera trap is known a priori. This assumption closely aligns with real-world deployments, where practitioners typically possess prior knowledge of the local fauna derived from historical observations or metadata. To ensure the broader generaliz-ability of our findings, we provide additional experiments in the Sec. C for scenarios where species are unknown be-forehand. 

Evaluation metric. For each camera trap, we compute a model’s average per-class accuracy within each interval (Balanced Accuracy), and then average these values across all intervals to obtain the overall performance. 

4.1. Is Adaptation still Required with Foundation Models? 

In practice, ecological practitioners often face this press-ing question before deployment, especially as recent bio-logical vision foundation models [19, 45] already achieve state-of-the-art zero-shot accuracy across various biodiver-sity datasets, including subsets of the LILA BC repository. 

Zero-shot baseline. We begin by evaluating the zero-shot performance of BioCLIP 2 for all 546 camera traps in STREAM TRAP . To construct the zero-shot classifier head, we utilize each species’ common name as the text label and apply OpenAI’s standard prompt templates to generate the text embeddings. Formally, let fθ denote the pre-trained vision encoder and wc the L2-normalized text embedding of class c. Given an image patch x, the predicted class is 

ˆy = arg max c w⊤ 

> c

fθ (x). As illustrated in Fig. 4a, we ob-serve a significant variability in zero-shot accuracy across 546 camera traps: BioCLIP 2 exceeds 90% accuracy on 161 camera traps, highlighting its strong potential in wildlife monitoring, yet 162 camera traps fall in the 50–80% range. This wide performance spread suggests that while zero-shot models provide a strong baseline, there remains a persis-tent, critical need for site-specific adaptation. We include zero-shot results for other foundation models in the Sec. B for reference. 

4.2. Adaptation is Challenging in the Real World. 

When end-users find that off-the-shelf foundation models underperform at their camera traps, the natural next step is to adapt them using labeled data collected at that site over time. The streaming evaluation protocol in S TREAM TRAP 

is designed to mirror this real-world deployment lifecycle (Sec. 3). Concretely, for a given camera trap at interval j,the model is updated with the cumulative labeled training data collected up to the j-th interval, and is subsequently evaluated on the test data from the (j + 1) -th interval. 

Preliminary study. Supervised fine-tuning is arguably the most common adaptation strategy. We introduce the accu-mulated model as the baseline, which naively fine-tunes on all training data collected up to interval j. We initialize the base model with BioCLIP 2, consistent with the zero-shot model described above. The model is fine-tuned us-ing a standard cross-entropy loss and a cosine learning rate scheduler with a base learning rate of 2.5 × 10 −5. We re-emphasize that under our evaluation, test data is exclusively drawn from the future interval (j+1) . To ensure the gener-alizability of our findings, we select 20 representative cam-era traps for this preliminary study, strategically sampled to span a wide spectrum of zero-shot accuracies. Surpris-ingly, as shown in Tab. 1, naive accumulated fine-tuning 

consistently underperforms the zero-shot baseline with a large margin. Notably, this baseline is already optimistic: it uses all historical labeled data at each update step and does not impose any computation or storage constraints. The fact that this unconstrained, accumulated fine-tuning still under-performs the zero-shot baseline starkly underscores the se-vere generalization challenges inherent to realistic cam-era trap temporal adaptation , which motivates a deeper diagnosis of the underlying drivers of failure . More exper-imental details and comprehensive results are provided in the Sec. C. 50 100 200 300 400 500            

> Camera Trap Index
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> Per-Class Accuracy (%)
> (a)
> Zero-shot
> 0100 200 300 400 500
> Camera Trap Index
> -60
> -30
> 0
> 30
> 60
> (b)
> Oracle - Zero-shot
> 0100 200 300 400 500
> Camera Trap Index
> -40
> -20
> 0
> 20
> 40
> (c)
> Oracle - Zero-shot

Figure 4. (a). Zero-shot performance across camera traps. Blue: above 90% accuracy; red: below 80%. (b). Accuracy difference between oracle naive fine-tuning and zero-shot. Blue: oracle outperforms zero-shot; red: zero-shot is superior. (c). Accuracy difference between oracle fine-tuning with our adaptation recipe (Oracle ⋆) and zero-shot. 

4.3. Diagnosing the Drivers of Adaptation Chal-lenges 

We hypothesize that the severe adaptation difficulties may stem from two distinct but compounding factors: (1) the inter-interval distribution shifts driven by temporal non-stationarity; (2) the inherent difficulty of the camera trap. 

Intrinsic difficulty even without temporal shift. To disen-tangle these factors, we first consider a deliberately cheating 

setting that removes the effect of inter-interval shift. Specif-ically, we train an oracle model using all labeled training data across all time intervals at a site, and evaluate it on held-out test data (thus matching the standard i.i.d.-style training paradigm more closely). Under this simplified set-ting, one might expect the oracle to consistently outper-form the zero-shot baseline. Surprisingly, this is not the case: on 214/546 camera traps ( ∼40%), the oracle model still underperforms the zero-shot model (Fig. 4b). This re-sult indicates that temporal shift is not the sole source of difficulty; rather, the optimization and generalization chal-lenges inherent to camera-trap data are already substantial even when train and test distributions are more aligned. Diving deeper into the data characteristics, we observe that because camera traps acquire images passively (wait-ing for animals to appear), many species are rarely ob-served within a given timeframe. This fundamental mech-anism inherently produces extreme class imbalance within each camera trap. As shown in Fig. 3, the top two major-ity classes typically dominate, accounting for an average of 

∼71% of the total images per camera trap. Compounding this issue, the minority classes exist in an extremely low-shot regime: on average, the two least-frequent classes con-tain only ∼49 images in a camera trap, compared to ∼4500 images for the two majority classes. Attempting to fine-tune a foundation model on such severely imbalanced, low-shot data inevitably introduces bias, amplifies memoriza-tion, and ultimately harms generalization. 

Temporal shift is pervasive. The inherent non-stationarity of natural ecosystems causes both the background context (vegetation, illumination, weather) and the animal popula-tion distributions to undergo profound shifts between con-secutive intervals, as illustrated in Fig. 5. To formally quan-tify the animal class distribution shift between consecutive intervals, we propose the Temporal Class Distribution Shift (TCDS) metric for a specific camera trap. For class c at in-terval j, let the normalized class frequency be pcj = ncj 

> P
> knkj

,where ncj is the sample count of class c in interval j. We can define: TCDS := 

> Average over all intervals

z }| {

1

n − 1

> n−1

X

> j=1

X

> c

pcj − pcj+1 

| {z }

> Class distribution shift between intervals

TCDS captures the average magnitude of temporal shift in class distributions across all consecutive intervals for a camera trap. As illustrated in Fig. 5 (Bottom), this metric effectively quantifies class distribution shifts across exam-ple camera traps, where higher TCDS values correspond to greater temporal shifts. Unfortunately, a substantial fraction of the camera traps exhibit exceptionally high TCDS values (Fig. 3). Thus, a model that achieves high accuracy on the current interval is fundamentally not guaranteed to main-tain that performance when confronted with the drastically shifted data distributions of future intervals. 

Compounding effects. These two primary drivers (severe data imbalance and profound temporal shifts) become en-tangled in practice. They create a compounding effect that renders continual adaptation exceptionally difficult during real-world streaming evaluations. This diagnosis motivates the need for an effective, robust recipe that enables end-users to maintain reliably accurate models in dynamic envi-ronments. 6Interval 1                   

> TCDS: 0.7712
> Interval 2Interval 3Interval 4 Interval 5Interval 6
> TCDS: 0.1166
> Interval 1 Interval 2Interval 3Interval 4 Interval 5Interval 6

Figure 5. Illustration of temporal shifts. (Top) A camera trap showing shifting context over time. (Bottom) Pie charts (class fre-quency per interval) comparing two camera traps: the first camera exhibits higher temporal shifts ( TCDS=0.7712 ) than the second (TCDS=0.1166 ). 

4.4. Practical Recipes for Robust Adaptation. 

In this section, we explore machine learning techniques that can overcome the adaptation challenges discussed above, ultimately establishing a practical and effective ”first-to-try” adaptation recipe for end-users. 

Improving Generalization. We first focus on strategies to mitigate the severe generalization degradation caused by extreme class imbalance and low-shot data. Motivated by prior literature on long-tailed recognition and efficient adap-tation [31, 60], we investigate two primary directions: 

Class-imbalanced loss. Standard cross-entropy fine-tuning on severely imbalanced data inherently biases the model to-ward majority classes, yielding poor generalization across classes [13, 56, 57]. Class-imbalanced loss functions offer a simple and effective mitigation. We explore several estab-lished methods, including Balanced Softmax (BSM) [39], Class-Balanced Focal Loss (CB-Focal) [12], and Class-Dependent Temperatures (CDT) [58]. As detailed in our ablation studies (Sec. B), we find that BSM delivers con-sistent improvements across camera traps without requir-ing hyperparameter tuning, whereas CB-Focal and CDT re-quire more hyperparameter tuning, which is often infea-sible for camera trap deployments. We therefore adopt BSM as our default imbalance-aware loss: LBSM (x, y ) = 

− log 

 ny exp( ηy (x)) P  

> cncexp( ηc(x))



where ηc(x) = w⊤ 

> c

fθ (x) denotes the logit for class c, and nc is the number of training in-stances for class c.

Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT). Fully fine-tuning on imperfect data often risks corrupting the gener-alized representations inherent to foundation models [31]. Unlike full fine-tuning, which updates all network param-eters, PEFT modifies only a minimal subset of weights, thereby preserving pre-trained knowledge [31]. We eval-uate three representative PEFT approaches: Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [22], Visual Prompt Tuning (VPT) [25], and Adapter Tuning [21]. Our ablations (Sec. B) demon-strate that LoRA, which introduces trainable low-rank ma-trices into the attention projection layers, achieves superior performance without heavy hyperparameter tuning. Conse-quently, we adopt LoRA as our default fine-tuning mecha-nism. 

Synergy between imbalance loss and PEFT. To rigor-ously assess the isolated and combined impacts of these two directions, we conduct an ablation study on a representa-tive subset of 20 camera traps with the oracle setting. We observe that applying either the imbalance loss (BSM) or PEFT (LoRA) in isolation yields only marginal improve-ments (less than 1%) over naive full fine-tuning. However, combining BSM + LoRA yields a substantial, compounding performance boost, strongly suggesting their compatibility and complementarity. Motivated by this result, we consider the BSM + LoRA as our recommended adaptation recipe for camera traps (denoted hereafter as ⋆). Applying this recipe to the oracle models (oracle ⋆) across all 546 cam-era traps in the S TREAM TRAP benchmark enables 474 sites (compared to only 332 for the naive oracle) to successfully outperform the zero-shot baseline (Fig. 4c). While there re-main 72 camera traps where this recipe falls short, we pro-vide a detailed qualitative and quantitative analysis of these specific failure cases in Sec. C. 

Mitigating Temporal Shifts. Our proposed adaptation recipe ( ⋆) successfully transfers its effectiveness from the idealized oracle setting to the accumulated model evaluated under the realistic streaming protocol. As shown in Tab. 1, the accumulated model equipped with our recipe (denoted as accum ⋆) consistently outperforms the zero-shot baseline. However, a non-negligible performance gap persists be-tween the accum ⋆ models and corresponding upper bounds (the oracle ⋆ models) on certain camera traps. This discrep-ancy is primarily driven by inter-interval distribution shifts, which inherently complicate streaming evaluations. Miti-gating such temporal shifts is notoriously difficult due to the unpredictability of future data distributions, a challenge that remains largely underexplored in the vision community. To bridge this gap, we evaluate various approaches and identify three promising post-processing techniques that can poten-tially improve the accum ⋆ model. 

Post-hoc logit calibration. When some classes are ab-sent or extremely low-shot during fine-tuning, the updated model tends to heavily suppress their predicted logits rel-ative to the majority classes, even if the foundation model originally represented them well [30, 49]. To rectify this bias, we adopt a post-hoc logit calibration [30] to boost the logits of absent or minority classes to a magnitude compara-ble to the majority classes by introducing a calibration fac-tor γ [30]: ˆy = arg max c w⊤ 

> c

fθ (x) + γ · 1[c ∈ A ], where 

A denotes absent/minority classes in the current interval. 7Figure 6. Performance gain ( ∆accum ⋆) of calibration, weight interpolation, and model selection over the accum ⋆ baseline. They are applied on top of accum ⋆. More results in Sec. C. 

Weight interpolation. While fine-tuning enables nec-essary task-specific adaptation, it risks forgetting of the foundation model’s broad generalization capabilities. To strike a balance between generalizable pre-trained knowl-edge and site-specific features, we apply weight interpola-tion (WiSE) [54]. Let θ′ be the fine-tuned weights and θ

the pre-trained weights. The interpolated weights are given by θ(α) = αθ + (1 − α)θ′ where α ∈ [0 , 1] controls the interpolation ratio. 

Interval model selection. Because we cannot observe fu-ture data at update time, the most recently adapted model is not necessarily the best match for the next interval: due to recurring seasonal patterns or abrupt changes, interval 

(j +1) may resemble an earlier interval more than the most recent one. To investigate the feasibility of exploiting this phenomenon, we conduct a preliminary study in which we explicitly select the historical and current model that attains the highest accuracy on the test split of interval j + 1 .

Promises and limits of post-processing. Fig. 6 illus-trates the relative gains each post-processing method of-fers over the baseline accum ⋆ model. Notably, for the sub-set of camera traps that initially underperformed the zero-shot baseline, at least one of these post-processing methods can recover the performance drop. Moreover, these tech-niques can effectively narrow the gap between the oracle ⋆

and accum ⋆ models, underscoring their tremendous poten-tial for mitigating temporal shift. However, we emphasize that we evaluate these approaches in an optimistic, upper-bound setting: selecting the performance-maximizing hy-perparameters to illustrate the potential of these methods. In real deployments, selecting hyperparameters without ac-cess to future data remains a key open problem. We view this as an important research opportunity and encourage fu-ture work on principled mechanisms to resolve the degrada-tion caused by temporal shifts       

> Recommended Adaptation Recipes
> We recommend combining LoRA (PEFT) with BSM
> (imbalance loss) as a practical first-to-try adaptation strategy, augmented by post-processing techniques, such as logit calibration ,weight interpolation , or interval model selection , to compact inter-interval distribution shift.

## 5. More practical considerations 

Accurate real-world deployment involves more than select-ing an adaptation algorithm. Practically, key questions in-clude when a foundation model is sufficient, whether con-tinual adaptation is necessary, and when adaptation should occur. Despite their importance for real-world deployment, they remain largely underexplored in the vision commu-nity. This section provides preliminary analyses with sim-ple baselines and highlights several directions for future re-search. 

5.0.1. When is the zero-shot model sufficient? 

In real-world deployments, practitioners must predict whether a foundation model’s zero-shot performance is suf-ficient for a new site. If yes, the model can be deployed directly without data collection and adaptation. However, this decision must typically be made before labeled data from the new site are available, making zero-shot accuracy hard to estimate in advance. Despite its practical impor-tance, this problem remains largely underexplored in the vision community. As a simple baseline, we assess if out-of-distribution (OOD) signals can provide an indication of zero-shot accuracy [55]. The intuition is that if images from a new camera trap are closer to the training distri-bution, the model may produce higher-confidence predic-tions and achieve better zero-shot accuracy. Specifically, 8Figure 7. Non-OOD scores (MSP) correlate with zero-shot. 

we adopt the Maximum Softmax Probability (MSP) [20], assigning each test sample a non-OOD score: sMSP (x) = max c exp( ηc(x)/τ )P    

> c′exp( ηc′(x)/τ )

where ηc(x) = w⊤ 

> c

fθ (x) denotes the logit for class c, and τ is a temperature parameter. We plot the average non-OOD score for each camera trap against the zero-shot accuracy in Fig. 7. While a posi-tive correlation can be observed, many camera traps deviate from this pattern, indicating that confidence signals alone are insufficient to reliably predict zero-shot performance. This highlights the difficulty of estimating zero-shot suffi-ciency prior to deployment, suggesting it as an open prob-lem for future work.            

> Stage 0% 25% 50% 75% 100%
> Acc. 76.2 73.1 77.8 82.7 84.9
> Table 2. Accum ⋆frozen at a specific interval ( e.g ., 25% = adapted on first 25% of intervals) and evaluated on all future intervals. Av-eraged across 8 camera traps (12+ intervals each).

5.0.2. Do we need continual adaptation? 

Another practical question raised by end-users is: once a model has been updated over several initial intervals and has sufficiently learned site-specific characteristics, will it gen-eralize well enough to handle all future data without further fine-tuning? To empirically investigate this, we conduct a controlled study where adaptation is deliberately halted after a fixed number of intervals. Specifically, for cam-era traps with long deployment durations (spanning more than one year), the accumulated model is frozen at a spe-cific interval and subsequently evaluated on all remaining future intervals. As demonstrated in Tab. 2, model accu-racy generally improves as it is adapted on progressively more intervals. This trend clearly indicates that continually assimilating additional site-specific data over time yields compounding performance benefits. But our analysis also reveals that not all temporal updates are strictly necessary. Because certain intervals provide significantly richer adap-

> Figure 8. The Adapt-or-Skip problem described below.

tation signals than others, the marginal performance gain of updating fluctuates. This crucial observation motivates our next investigation: can we algorithmically determine when 

an adaptation step is actually required? 

5.0.3. When Should We Adapt? 

Adaptation incurs labeling and computational costs, making it crucial to determine when it is truly beneficial. However, this decision must be made before observing future perfor-mance, making it challenging in practice. At every interval, the end-users will face an Adapt-or-Skip problem: should we adapt at this interval or not? Despite its practical im-portance, this remains largely underexplored. Formally, at interval j, the end-user only has access to the previously trained model j−1, prior labeled intervals ( 1 . . . j − 1), and current unlabeled interval j. As illustrated in Fig. 8, the end-user must decide, before observing the test data of interval 

j+1 , whether to adapt the model using interval j (train model j ) or skip adaptation and continue using model j−1.The correct decision is defined as whichever choice yields higher accuracy on the interval j+1 test data. We construct a dataset where half of the intervals favor adapting and half favor skipping. We evaluate three simple baseline methods: random, MSP-based, and CLIP feature-based. However, both methods perform similarly to random guessing, high-lighting the difficulty of the problem. For reference, we re-port an upper-bound that always selects the correct decision, which outperforms the three baselines by 11.34%, suggest-ing substantial room for future research. More details are provided in Appendix. 

## 6. Conclusion 

We present the first study of camera-trap species recogni-tion over time, prioritizing reliable, long-term fixed-site de-ployment. Our benchmark, S TREAM TRAP , uses a stream-ing evaluation protocol reflecting real-world data collec-tion. Because naive foundation model fine-tuning fails un-der extreme data imbalance and temporal shifts, we provide robust adaptation recipes and analyze critical deployment challenges to guide practitioners and spur future research. 9Acknowledgment 

This research is supported by grants from the National Sci-ence Foundation (ICICLE: OAC-2112606). We are grateful for the support of the Ohio Supercomputer Center for pro-viding computational resources. 

## References 

[1] Lila bc: Labeled information library of alexandria: Biology and conservation. https://lila.science/ . 2, 4 [2] Rahaf Aljundi, Min Lin, Baptiste Goujaud, and Yoshua Ben-gio. Gradient based sample selection for online continual learning. Advances in neural information processing sys-tems , 32, 2019. 1 [3] Victor Anton, Stephen Hartley, Andre Geldenhuis, and Heiko U Wittmer. Monitoring the mammalian fauna of ur-ban areas using remote cameras and citizen science. Journal of Urban Ecology , 4(1):juy002, 2018. 8 [4] Sara Beery. The MegaDetector: Large-scale deployment of computer vision for conservation and biodiversity monitor-ing. In AI for Social Impact . Cambridge University Press, 2023. 4, 6 [5] Sara Beery, Grant Van Horn, and Pietro Perona. Recognition in terra incognita. In Proceedings of the European confer-ence on computer vision (ECCV) , pages 456–473, 2018. 6, 8[6] Sara Beery, Grant Van Horn, and Pietro Perona. Recognition in terra incognita. In Proceedings of the European confer-ence on computer vision (ECCV) , pages 456–473, 2018. 1 [7] Sara Beery, Grant Van Horn, Oisin Mac Aodha, and Pietro Perona. The iwildcam 2018 challenge dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.05986 , 2019. 3, 1 [8] Sara Beery, Arushi Agarwal, Elijah Cole, and Vighnesh Birodkar. The iwildcam 2021 competition dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.03494 , 2021. 2, 3, 1 [9] Peggy A Bevan, Omiros Pantazis, Holly Pringle, Guil-herme Braga Ferreira, Daniel J Ingram, Emily Madsen, Liam Thomas, Dol Raj Thanet, Thakur Silwal, Santosh Rayama-jhi, et al. Deep learning-based ecological analysis of camera trap images is impacted by training data quality and quantity. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.14348 , 2024. 3, 2 [10] Luigi Boitani. Camera trapping for wildlife research .Pelagic Publishing Ltd, 2016. 3, 1 [11] Ludwig Bothmann, Lisa Wimmer, Omid Charrakh, Tobias Weber, Hendrik Edelhoff, Wibke Peters, Hien Nguyen, Caryl Benjamin, and Annette Menzel. Automated wildlife image classification: An active learning tool for ecological applica-tions. Ecological Informatics , 77:102231, 2023. 1 [12] Yin Cui, Menglin Jia, Tsung-Yi Lin, Yang Song, and Serge Belongie. Class-balanced loss based on effective number of samples, 2019. 7, 2 [13] Yin Cui, Menglin Jia, Tsung-Yi Lin, Yang Song, and Serge Belongie. Class-balanced loss based on effective number of samples. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 9268–9277, 2019. 7 [14] Matthias De Lange, Rahaf Aljundi, Marc Masana, Sarah Parisot, Xu Jia, Aleˇ s Leonardis, Gregory Slabaugh, and Tinne Tuytelaars. A continual learning survey: Defying for-getting in classification tasks. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 44(7):3366–3385, 2021. 1[15] Zalan Fabian, Zhongqi Miao, Chunyuan Li, Yuanhan Zhang, Ziwei Liu, Andr´ es Hern´ andez, Andr´ es Montes-Rojas, Rafael Escucha, Laura Siabatto, Andr´ es Link, et al. Multimodal foundation models for zero-shot animal species recognition in camera trap images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.01064 ,2023. 3, 1 [16] Abolfazl Farahani, Sahar Voghoei, Khaled Rasheed, and Hamid R Arabnia. A brief review of domain adaptation. 

Advances in data science and information engineering: pro-ceedings from ICDATA 2020 and IKE 2020 , pages 877–894, 2021. 1 [17] Valentin Gabeff, Marc Rußwurm, Devis Tuia, and Alexan-der Mathis. Wildclip: Scene and animal attribute retrieval from camera trap data with domain-adapted vision-language models. International Journal of Computer Vision , 132(9): 3770–3786, 2024. 3, 1 [18] Boqing Gong, Yuan Shi, Fei Sha, and Kristen Grauman. Geodesic flow kernel for unsupervised domain adaptation. In 2012 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 2066–2073. IEEE, 2012. 4 [19] Jianyang Gu, Samuel Stevens, Elizabeth G Campolongo, Matthew J Thompson, Net Zhang, Jiaman Wu, Andrei Kopanev, Zheda Mai, Alexander E White, James Balhoff, et al. Bioclip 2: Emergent properties from scaling hierarchi-cal contrastive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23883 ,2025. 2, 4, 5 [20] Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel. A baseline for detect-ing misclassified and out-of-distribution examples in neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.02136 , 2016. 9 [21] Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Bruna Morrone, Quentin de Laroussilhe, Andrea Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly. Parameter-efficient transfer learning for nlp, 2019. 7, 2 [22] Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu Chen, et al. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. ICLR ,1(2):3, 2022. 7, 2 [23] Idaho Department of Fish and Game. Idaho camera traps. https://lila.science/datasets/idaho-camera-traps/ . 8 [24] IUCN SSC Asian Wild Cattle Specialist Group’s Saola Working Group. Northern and central annamites camera traps 2.0. Dataset, 2021. SWG (2021). 6 [25] Menglin Jia, Luming Tang, Bor-Chun Chen, Claire Cardie, Serge Belongie, Bharath Hariharan, and Ser-Nam Lim. Vi-sual prompt tuning, 2022. 7, 2 [26] Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa, Henrik Marklund, Sang Michael Xie, Marvin Zhang, Akshay Balsubra-mani, Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Richard Lanas Phillips, Irena Gao, et al. Wilds: A benchmark of in-the-wild distribution shifts. In International conference on machine learning , pages 5637–5664. PMLR, 2021. 2, 3, 1 

10 [27] Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Doll´ ar, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In 

European conference on computer vision , pages 740–755. Springer, 2014. 6 [28] Zheda Mai, Ruiwen Li, Hyunwoo Kim, and Scott San-ner. Supervised contrastive replay: Revisiting the nearest class mean classifier in online class-incremental continual learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 3589–3599, 2021. 1 [29] Zheda Mai, Ruiwen Li, Jihwan Jeong, David Quispe, Hyun-woo Kim, and Scott Sanner. Online continual learning in image classification: An empirical survey. Neurocomputing ,469:28–51, 2022. 3, 4, 1 [30] Zheda Mai, Arpita Chowdhury, Ping Zhang, Cheng-Hao Tu, Hong-You Chen, Vardaan Pahuja, Tanya Berger-Wolf, Song Gao, Charles Stewart, Yu Su, et al. Fine-tuning is fine, if cali-brated. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,37:136084–136119, 2024. 2, 3, 7, 1 [31] Zheda Mai, Ping Zhang, Cheng-Hao Tu, Hong-You Chen, Quang-Huy Nguyen, Li Zhang, and Wei-Lun Chao. Lessons and insights from a unifying study of parameter-efficient fine-tuning (peft) in visual recognition. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 14845–14857, 2025. 2, 7 [32] Farjad Malik, Simon Wouters, Ruben Cartuyvels, Erfan Ghadery, and Marie-Francine Moens. Two-phase training mitigates class imbalance for camera trap image classifica-tion with cnns. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.14491 , 2021. 3, 2[33] New Zealand Trailcams. Trail camera images of new zealand animals. https://lila.science/datasets/nz-trailcams . 8 [34] Mohammad Sadegh Norouzzadeh, Anh Nguyen, Margaret Kosmala, Alexandra Swanson, Meredith S Palmer, Craig Packer, and Jeff Clune. Automatically identifying, count-ing, and describing wild animals in camera-trap images with deep learning. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-ences , 115(25):E5716–E5725, 2018. 3, 1 [35] Lain E Pardo, Sara Bombaci, Sarah E Huebner, Michael J Somers, Herve Fritz, Colleen Downs, Abby Guthmann, Robyn S Hetem, Mark Keith, Aliza le Roux, et al. Snap-shot safari: A large-scale collaborative to monitor africa’s remarkable biodiversity. South African Journal of Science ,117(1-2):1–4, 2021. 8 [36] Laura J Pollock, Justin Kitzes, Sara Beery, Kaitlyn M Gaynor, Marta A Jarzyna, Oisin Mac Aodha, Bernd Meyer, David Rolnick, Graham W Taylor, Devis Tuia, et al. Har-nessing artificial intelligence to fill global shortfalls in biodi-versity knowledge. Nature Reviews Biodiversity , pages 1–17, 2025. 2, 3 [37] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision, 2021. 2 [38] Jiawei Ren, Cunjun Yu, Xiao Ma, Haiyu Zhao, Shuai Yi, et al. Balanced meta-softmax for long-tailed visual recog-nition. Advances in neural information processing systems ,33:4175–4186, 2020. 2, 3 [39] Jiawei Ren, Cunjun Yu, Shunan Sheng, Xiao Ma, Haiyu Zhao, Shuai Yi, and Hongsheng Li. Balanced meta-softmax for long-tailed visual recognition, 2020. 7, 2 [40] Salim Rezvani and Xizhao Wang. A broad review on class imbalance learning techniques. Applied Soft Computing ,143:110415, 2023. 3, 2 [41] Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tony Lee, Irena Gao, Sang Michael Xie, Kendrick Shen, Ananya Kumar, Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Henrik Marklund, et al. Extend-ing the wilds benchmark for unsupervised adaptation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.05090 , 2021. 2, 3 [42] Julian D Santamaria, Claudia Isaza, and Jhony H Giraldo. Catalog: A camera trap language-guided contrastive learning model. In 2025 IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applica-tions of Computer Vision (WACV) , pages 1197–1206. IEEE, 2025. 1 [43] Dongsub Shim, Zheda Mai, Jihwan Jeong, Scott San-ner, Hyunwoo Kim, and Jongseong Jang. Online class-incremental continual learning with adversarial shapley value. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 9630–9638, 2021. 1 [44] Peeyush Singhal, Rahee Walambe, Sheela Ramanna, and Ketan Kotecha. Domain adaptation: challenges, methods, datasets, and applications. IEEE access , 11:6973–7020, 2023. 4 [45] Samuel Stevens, Jiaman Wu, Matthew J Thompson, Eliza-beth G Campolongo, Chan Hee Song, David Edward Carlyn, Li Dong, Wasila M Dahdul, Charles Stewart, Tanya Berger-Wolf, et al. Bioclip: A vision foundation model for the tree of life. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on com-puter vision and pattern recognition , pages 19412–19424, 2024. 2, 5 [46] Alexandra Swanson, Margaret Kosmala, Chris Lintott, Robert Simpson, Arfon Smith, and Craig Packer. Snapshot serengeti, high-frequency annotated camera trap images of 40 mammalian species in an african savanna. Scientific data ,2(1):1–14, 2015. 1, 6, 8 [47] Michael A Tabak, Mohammad S Norouzzadeh, David W Wolfson, Steven J Sweeney, Kurt C VerCauteren, Nathan P Snow, Joseph M Halseth, Paul A Di Salvo, Jesse S Lewis, Michael D White, et al. Machine learning to classify ani-mal species in camera trap images: Applications in ecology. 

Methods in Ecology and Evolution , 10(4):585–590, 2019. 6, 8[48] Franck Trolliet, C´ edric Vermeulen, Marie-Claude Huynen, and Alain Hambuckers. Use of camera traps for wildlife studies: a review. Biotechnologie, Agronomie, Soci´ et´ e et En-vironnement , 18(3), 2014. 3, 1 [49] Cheng-Hao Tu, Hong-You Chen, Zheda Mai, Jike Zhong, Vardaan Pahuja, Tanya Berger-Wolf, Song Gao, Charles Stewart, Yu Su, and Wei-Lun Harry Chao. Holistic trans-fer: towards non-disruptive fine-tuning with partial target data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,36:29149–29173, 2023. 2, 3, 7 

11 [50] Devis Tuia, Benjamin Kellenberger, Sara Beery, Blair R Costelloe, Silvia Zuffi, Benjamin Risse, Alexander Mathis, Mackenzie W Mathis, Frank Van Langevelde, Tilo Burghardt, et al. Perspectives in machine learning for wildlife conservation. Nature communications , 13(1):792, 2022. 2, 3 [51] Grant Van Horn, Oisin Mac Aodha, Yang Song, Yin Cui, Chen Sun, Alex Shepard, Hartwig Adam, Pietro Perona, and Serge Belongie. The inaturalist species classification and de-tection dataset. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 8769–8778, 2018. 6 [52] Delia Velasco-Montero, Jorge Fern´ andez-Berni, Ricardo Carmona-Gal´ an, Ariadna Sanglas, and Francisco Palomares. Reliable and efficient integration of ai into camera traps for smart wildlife monitoring based on continual learning. Eco-logical Informatics , 83:102815, 2024. 1 [53] Juliana V´ elez, William McShea, Hila Shamon, Paula J Castiblanco-Camacho, Michael A Tabak, Carl Chalmers, Paul Fergus, and John Fieberg. An evaluation of platforms for processing camera-trap data using artificial intelligence. 

Methods in Ecology and Evolution , 14(2):459–477, 2023. 8 [54] Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Jong Wook Kim, Mike Li, Simon Kornblith, Rebecca Roelofs, Raphael Gon-tijo Lopes, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali Farhadi, Hongseok Namkoong, et al. Robust fine-tuning of zero-shot models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vi-sion and pattern recognition , pages 7959–7971, 2022. 2, 8 [55] Jingkang Yang, Kaiyang Zhou, Yixuan Li, and Ziwei Liu. Generalized out-of-distribution detection: A survey. Inter-national Journal of Computer Vision , 132(12):5635–5662, 2024. 8 [56] Han-Jia Ye, Hong-You Chen, De-Chuan Zhan, and Wei-Lun Chao. Identifying and compensating for feature deviation in imbalanced deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.01385 ,2020. 2, 7 [57] Han-Jia Ye, De-Chuan Zhan, and Wei-Lun Chao. Pro-crustean training for imbalanced deep learning. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 92–102, 2021. 7 [58] Han-Jia Ye, Hong-You Chen, De-Chuan Zhan, and Wei-Lun Chao. Identifying and compensating for feature deviation in imbalanced deep learning, 2022. 7, 2 [59] Xiaoyuan Yu, Jiangping Wang, Roland Kays, Patrick A Jansen, Tianjiang Wang, and Thomas Huang. Automated identification of animal species in camera trap images. 

EURASIP Journal on Image and Video Processing , 2013(1): 52, 2013. 3, 1 [60] Yifan Zhang, Bingyi Kang, Bryan Hooi, Shuicheng Yan, and Jiashi Feng. Deep long-tailed learning: A survey. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence ,45(9):10795–10816, 2023. 3, 7, 2 [61] Kaiyang Zhou, Ziwei Liu, Yu Qiao, Tao Xiang, and Chen Change Loy. Domain generalization: A survey. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence ,45(4):4396–4415, 2022. 2, 3 [62] Haowei Zhu, Ye Tian, and Junguo Zhang. Class incremental learning for wildlife biodiversity monitoring in camera trap images. Ecological Informatics , 71:101760, 2022. 1 

12 Lessons and Open Questions from a Unified Study of Camera-Trap Species Recognition Over Time 

# Supplementary Material 

In this supplementary material, we provide more details and experiment results in addition to the main paper: • Sec. A: Detailed Related Work • Sec. B: Adaptation Recipe: Details and Ablations • Sec. C: Additional Details and Results • Sec. D: S TREAM TRAP : Construction Details 

## A. Detailed Related Work 

A.1. Camera Trap Data in Computer Vision 

Large-scale wildlife image collections captured through camera traps have emerged as invaluable resources for bio-diversity monitoring, providing critical insights into species richness, occupancy patterns, and animal behaviors [10, 48]. These automated imaging systems generate substan-tial volumes of visual data, typically requiring extensive off-site manual analysis. To alleviate this bottleneck, deep neural networks have been increasingly adopted for au-tomating tasks such as species detection and classifica-tion, positioning camera trap datasets as pivotal resources within the computer vision and machine learning commu-nities [34, 59]. A significant research direction involves the generaliza-tion capabilities of models trained on camera trap data [26, 30]. Specifically, systems trained to detect and classify animals are frequently deployed in novel geographical lo-cations without subsequent fine-tuning. To accurately re-flect this practical constraint, the widely recognized iWild-Cam challenges [7, 8] deliberately partition their datasets by camera location. This ensures no overlap between training and test camera locations, providing a robust evaluation of model generalization to unseen environments. Additionally, with the advent of multimodal foundation models, camera trap imagery has increasingly been integrated into multi-modal analysis frameworks to enhance wildlife monitoring through richer contextual understanding [15, 17]. In paral-lel, CATALOG [42] demonstrates that combining multiple foundation models within a contrastive learning framework improves zero-shot camera trap recognition across Snap-shot Serengeti [46] and Terra Incognita [6]. Recent work also emphasizes label efficiency and practitioner usability: Bothmann et al. propose an active-learning-based pipeline that couples object detection, careful hyperparameter tun-ing, and iterative query strategies to train accurate wildlife classifiers from relatively small, region-specific camera trap datasets [11]. While existing literature largely frames camera trap anal-ysis as a cross-domain generalization problem, this perspec-tive diverges from the practical needs of end-users such as ecologists and conservation practitioners. Their pri-mary concern is sustaining reliable species recognition at a fixed deployment site over time , where seasonal varia-tions, habitat changes, and animal migration continuously reshape both animal appearances and backgrounds, caus-ing model performance to degrade substantially over ex-tended deployments. To address this critical gap, we con-duct a unified, end-user-centric study that reframes eval-uation around the actual deployment lifecycle, systemati-cally characterizing adaptation challenges and deriving ac-tionable guidelines for long-term camera trap deployment. 

A.2. Continual Learning 

Unlike conventional domain adaptation settings [14, 16], where data with distribution shifts are available all at once, continual learning deals with models that must adapt to non-stationary data streams over time [29]. A key challenge is maintaining reliable performance as distributions shift, whether from new classes, changing backgrounds, or evolv-ing environmental conditions [2, 28, 43]. However, most existing benchmarks artificially partition datasets without actual timestamps, creating evaluation scenarios that are ei-ther unrealistically simple or excessively challenging [29]. Recently, Velasco-Montero et al. demonstrated how con-tinual learning could be embedded into smart camera traps for efficient deployment, but their focus was primarily on hardware and system design [52]. Zhu et al. studied class-incremental learning for wildlife monitoring but did not ac-count for the real temporal order in camera trap data [62]. More broadly, conventional continual learning assumes lim-ited access to past data due to privacy or storage constraints, an assumption that does not hold in ecological deployments where labeled camera trap data is a persistent, archivable resource. We therefore train on the full historical record at each interval to reflect this reality, naturally exposing tem-poral non-stationarity as the central challenge, and provid-ing a real-world testbed grounded in genuine ecological dy-namics for the broader continual learning community. 

A.3. Class Imbalanced Learning 

The distribution of animal classes in camera trap datasets is often highly imbalanced. Models trained on such an im-balanced dataset are often heavily biased, performing ex-ceptionally well on majority classes while underperforming 1significantly on minority classes [9, 32]. However, mod-els that achieve balanced performance across all classes are more valuable, especially considering that rare classes are often of particular ecological interest. Techniques de-signed to mitigate class imbalance in deep learning can be broadly categorized into two groups: data-level methods, which modify the data distribution directly by oversampling or undersampling, and algorithm-level methods, which ad-just the learning process itself through specialized loss func-tions or other algorithmic modifications. For a comprehen-sive review of these approaches, we refer readers to recent surveys [40, 60]. In our study, we specifically explore sim-ple yet highly effective algorithm-level methods, such as the Balanced Softmax loss [38], to address class imbalance is-sues in camera trap datasets. 

## B. Adaptation Recipe: Details and Ablations 

BioCLIP 2 [19] CLIP [37] 84.3 72.3 

> Table A1. Zero-shot baseline selection. Average per-class accu-racy (%) across all camera traps in the S TREAM TRAP . BioCLIP 2 is selected as the zero-shot baseline due to its superior perfor-mance.

B.1. Zero-shot Baseline 

We adopt BioCLIP 2 [19] as our zero-shot baseline, as it delivers the strongest zero-shot performance on all camera traps in S TREAM TRAP . As shown in Tab. A1, BioCLIP 2 achieves an average zero-shot per-class accuracy of 84.3%, substantially outperforming CLIP [37]. This gap reflects BioCLIP 2’s pre-training on large-scale biological imagery, which enables it to better capture the fine-grained appear-ance variation inherent to camera trap data.               

> Hyperparameter Value
> Optimizer AdamW Max Learning Rate 2.5×10 −5
> Min Learning Rate 4.17 ×10 −7
> Weight Decay 1×10 −4
> LR Schedule Cosine Annealing ( Tmax = 60 )Batch Size 32 Table A2. Training configuration for fine-tuning BioCLIP 2.

B.2. Training Details 

We fine-tune BioCLIP 2 using the configuration summa-rized in Tab. A2. We employ early stopping based on vali-dation performance. For the oracle model, the validation set is constructed by randomly sampling two images per class from the training set. For the accumulated model at interval 

j, we use the test split of the preceding interval j−1 as the validation set. Loss FT Method Accuracy CE Full 85.9 BSM [39] Full 85.1 

CB-Focal [12] Full 83.2 CDT [58] Full 83.2 CE LoRA [22] 86.0 

CE VPT [25] 76.6 CE Adapter [21] 85.3 BSM [39] LoRA [22] 90.3  

> Table A3. Ablation of imbalance losses and PEFT fine-tuning (FT) methods. Average per-class accuracy (%) is reported. BSM and LoRA achieve the best performance. Our proposed adaptation recipe ( ⋆) is highlighted in blue.

B.3. Ablation of Imbalance Loss and PEFT 

We ablate imbalance losses and PEFT methods under the oracle setting to identify the most effective combination. Since evaluating all configurations across 546 camera traps in S TREAM TRAP is computationally expensive, we sub-sample 20 camera traps spanning the full range of accuracy gaps between naive oracle and zero-shot, ensuring coverage of both easy and challenging scenarios. 

Imbalance loss comparison. As shown in Fig. 3, se-vere class imbalance is a defining characteristic of cam-era traps in S TREAM TRAP , where a few dominant species account for most observations while many others ap-pear only sparsely. Training with standard cross-entropy biases the classifier toward majority classes, diminish-ing its ability to recognize minority species (Sec. A.3). To evaluate imbalance-aware training objectives, we compare three widely used methods: Balanced Soft-max (BSM) [39], Class-Balanced Focal Loss (CB-Focal; β=0 .999 , γ=0 .5) [12], and Class-Dependent Tem-peratures (CDT; γ=0 .3) [58]. Notably, BSM requires no additional hyperparameters, whereas CB-Focal and CDT require tuning. 

PEFT comparison. Unlike full fine-tuning, which risks corrupting the generalized representations of the founda-tion model, PEFT methods update only a minimal sub-set of parameters to better preserve pre-trained knowledge. We compare three representative approaches: Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA; r=8 ) [22], which introduces learnable low-rank matrices into all attention projection layers; Vi-sual Prompt Tuning (VPT-Deep; 10 prompt tokens per layer) [25], which steers the model by augmenting the in-put sequence with learnable tokens; and Adapter Tuning (bottleneck dimension = 8, α=1 .0) [21], which inserts lightweight bottleneck modules after both the attention and MLP sublayers. In all cases, only the newly introduced pa-rameters are updated while the backbone remains frozen. 2From ablation to recipe. As shown in Tab. A3, BSM yields the best average performance among the three im-balance losses, while CB-Focal and CDT exhibit perfor-mance degradation. For PEFT, LoRA consistently out-performs both VPT and adapter tuning, aligning with re-cent studies showing its stability in low-data regimes. We further examine the compatibility of the best-performing method from each direction. Moreover, BSM and LoRA are not only compatible but complementary: their com-bination yields the strongest and most consistent perfor-mance, where LoRA contributes stable and efficient adapta-tion while BSM effectively mitigates the severe class imbal-ance inherent in camera-trap streams. We therefore adopt BSM and LoRA as our recommended adaptation recipe ( ⋆). 

## C. Additional Details and Results 

C.1. Evaluating Beyond Assumptions 

In the Sec. 3 and Sec. 4, we adopt two assumptions to main-tain evaluation stability and mirror real-world deployment: a closed-set species vocabulary and the exclusion of rare species within each interval. To ensure the generalizability of our findings, we relax each assumption below. For both analyses, we evaluate ten camera traps sampled randomly.             

> Closed-Set Open-Set Closed-Set + Rare Species Zero-shot 82.5 37.8 73.1 Accum ⋆83.7 76.7 73.4 Oracle ⋆88.3 86.1 66.8
> Table A4. Average per-class accuracy (%) under relaxed evalua-tion assumptions. Open-Set expands the vocabulary to all 1,096 classes across S TREAM TRAP .Rare Species adds rare classes (fewer than 10 samples per interval) to the test set.

Open-set classification. In Sec. 4, we assume the candi-date species at each camera trap are known a priori (closed-set), allowing us to isolate temporal dynamics. Here, we re-lax this assumption by constructing an open-set vocabulary from all 1,096 classes across S TREAM TRAP and initializ-ing models with this expanded class list (open-set). This setting is more representative of real-world deployments where practitioners may not have complete prior knowledge of which species are present at a given site. It also tests whether the adaptation recipe remains effective when the model must discriminate among a substantially larger set of candidate species. 

Including rare species. As described in Sec. 3, rare species (fewer than 10 samples per interval) are excluded from eval-uation to prevent severe class imbalance. However, rare species are often of greatest ecological interest, as they may include threatened or endangered populations that require urgent conservation attention. To reflect this, we include them exclusively in the test set, as they lack sufficient data (a) (b)     

> Figure A1. (a.) Detailed accuracy difference between oracle fine-tuning with our adaptation recipe (Oracle ⋆) and zero-shot (Fig. 4c). (b.) Qualitative examples of camera traps with severely degraded visual quality (e.g., blur, exposure artifacts, and sensor noise).

for a train/test split. This setup evaluates whether adapted models can still recognize species that were never or barely seen during training. 

Results and analysis. The results in Tab. A4 indicate that all models perform worse under the open-set setting com-pared to the closed-set configuration, as the enlarged label space introduces additional confusion among visually simi-lar species. Including rare species also degrades all models, but the oracle ⋆ model suffers the largest drop, falling be-low both the zero-shot baseline and the accum ⋆ model. We hypothesize that the oracle ⋆ model over-adapts to dominant common classes across all pooled data, eroding the foun-dation model’s ability to recognize inherently rare species. The accum ⋆ model, by adapting incrementally, better pre-serves general representations and remains competitive with the zero-shot baseline. 

C.2. Remaining Failure Cases of Oracle ⋆

While our proposed approach generally improves the per-formance of the oracle models compared to the zero-shot baseline, 72 camera traps still underperform it (Fig. 4c). As illustrated in Fig. A1a, 48 of these 72 show a gap of at most 5%. However, the remaining 22 camera traps exhibit a more substantial degradation exceeding 5%. To better understand these limitations, we conduct a detailed analysis of these 22 camera traps, separating minor fluctuations from more systematic failure modes. 

Poor image quality (5–10%). For the 16 camera traps with a moderate performance gap (between 5 and 10%), the degradation is primarily driven by poor image quality. To accurately mirror real-world deployment conditions, we in-tentionally retain low-quality images in which animals are present but difficult to discern. As illustrated in Fig. A1b, the animal is visible upon close inspection, yet the degraded image quality introduces noise that can mislead the fine-tuned model—whereas the zero-shot baseline, not having been exposed to these noisy training signals, remains un-affected. Filtering such low-quality images could improve overall model performance, but we consider this outside the current scope and leave it as a direction for future work. 

Train–test distribution shift ( >10%). For the 6 cam-3Figure A2. Performance gain ( ∆accum ⋆) of calibration, weight interpolation, and model selection over the accum ⋆ baseline across 50 cameras. They are applied on top of accum ⋆.

era traps exhibiting a performance drop of more than 10%, the degradation consistently traces back to a severe distri-bution shift between the training and test splits. As de-scribed in Sec. D.3, S TREAM TRAP groups images from the same burst before splitting to reduce near-duplicate leakage across splits. While this makes the evaluation more realis-tic, it can also produce splits with markedly different visual conditions for some camera traps. For example, the train-ing split may contain mostly daytime images, whereas the test split contains mostly nighttime images. Such a distri-bution mismatch appears to be the primary factor behind the largest failure cases, while the zero-shot baseline retains general knowledge that transfers across both conditions.                 

> Accuracy ∆Oracle ⋆
> Oracle ⋆87.6 –Accum ⋆78.8 8.8 + Calibration 83.2 4.5 + Weight Interpolation 82.0 5.7 + Model Selection 85.1 2.5 + Best Post-Processing 86.2 1.4
> Table A5. Extended post-processing results by average per class accuracy (%). ∆Oracle ⋆denotes remaining gap to Oracle ⋆(87.6 %). Each method is applied on top of Accum ⋆. The blue row se-lects the best-performing post-processing method per camera trap.

C.3. Post-Processing: Extended Evaluation 

To complement the post-processing analysis in Sec. 4.4, we evaluate all three post-processing methods on 50 ad-ditional camera traps where oracle ⋆ outperforms the zero-shot baseline, sampled to span a diverse range of accu-racy gaps between the two models. As shown in Fig. A2 and Tab. A5, all methods yield promising improvements over the accum ⋆ baseline, and selecting the best-performing post-processing method per camera trap further narrows the gap with oracle ⋆. This suggests that with principled hyper-parameter selection, post-processing can substantially boost adapted models. Developing automatic hyperparameter se-lection mechanisms that do not require access to future data remains a promising direction for future work. 

C.4. Details of When Should We Adapt 

As discussed in Sec. 5 and illustrated in Fig. 8, practitioners must decide whether to adapt the model when a new interval of data arrives. We construct an adapt-or-skip benchmark on top of S TREAM TRAP to evaluate this. Throughout this section, we denote by model j the model trained on cumu-lative labeled data from intervals 1, . . . , j .

Experimental setup. Following the streaming protocol, at interval j, the learner has access to model j−1 and the unla-beled images from the current interval j. The learner must decide whether to: 

• Adapt : label the interval j data and train model j .

• Skip : continue using model j−1.This decision must be made before observing the test data from interval j + 1 . The chosen model (either model j−1 or 

model j ) is then evaluated on the test split of interval j + 1 .Each interval therefore, produces one adapt-or-skip deci-sion instance. To construct the benchmark, we uniformly sample 80 camera traps from those where the oracle ⋆ per-formance exceeds the zero-shot baseline, and subsample decision instances to obtain a balanced dataset with equal numbers of Adapt and Skip cases. We evaluate three simple decision heuristics: 

Random choice. Selects Adapt or Skip uniformly at ran-dom. 

MSP-based confidence method. We compute the mean Maximum Softmax Probability (MSP) of model j on the unlabeled images of interval j. The intuition is that model confidence can provide a coarse signal of distribution shift. Adaptation is triggered when the confidence falls below a threshold τMSP (j).

CLIP feature-distance method. We compute class pro-totypes using labeled data from intervals 1, . . . , j − 1 in CLIP feature space. For images in interval j, we measure the ℓ2 distance to the nearest class prototype and average across images. The intuition is that distribution shifts of-ten manifest as changes in the representation space of a model. Adaptation is triggered when the mean distance ex-ceeds threshold τfeat (j).Both thresholds are determined using statistics from the zero-shot model applied to the same unlabeled interval. 4(a) Average Per-Class Accuracy of each method. (b) Binary decision accuracy of each method.     

> Figure A3. Comparison of adapt-or-not methods on our balanced benchmark. Each interval is labeled as either a Skip case (where not adapting is correct) or an Adapt case (where adapting is correct), with Combined reporting overall accuracy across all intervals. Methods include Random, MSP-based, Feature-based, Always Adapt, Always Skip, and an Oracle upper bound. (a). Balanced accuracy under Skip, Adapt, and Combined evaluation. (b.) Binary decision accuracy of each method.

Baselines. For context, we also include two non-decision baselines: Always Adapt , which updates the model at every interval, and Always Skip , which never adapts. We addi-tionally report an Oracle upper bound that always selects the correct ground-truth action. The ground-truth action is defined as the choice (Adapt or Skip) that yields higher bal-anced accuracy on the test split of interval j + 1 .

Evaluation metrics. We evaluate methods using two met-rics: Balanced Accuracy , which measures the classification performance obtained by following the method’s decisions, and Binary Decision Accuracy , which measures the fraction of intervals where the method selects the correct action. 

Results and analysis. Results are summarized in Fig. A3a and Fig. A3b. On cases where the ground-truth action is 

Skip , the oracle and Always Skip coincide ( 86 .2% ), while 

Always Adapt underperforms ( 65 .3% ). Conversely, in cases where the correct action is Adapt , the oracle and Always Adapt coincide ( 89 .6% , while Always Skip falls to 64 .6% .The three heuristic decision strategies perform close to ran-dom guessing. Their combined balanced accuracies (Ran-dom: 77.4%, MSP: 75.9%, Feature: 76.4%) are substan-tially below the oracle (87.8%). Binary decision accuracy shows a similar pattern, with MSP and Feature selecting the correct action only 47–48% of the time. These results highlight that predicting when adaptation is beneficial remains a challenging and largely unexplored problem, motivating future research on more reliable adapt-or-not decision strategies. 

C.5. More Camera Trap Results 

Due to resource constraints, it is not feasible to conduct ex-periments across all 546 camera traps in S TREAM TRAP for every setting. As such, Tab. A8 reports the camera traps for which experiments on all settings have been completed. Tab. A9 summarizes the camera trap index used throughout all figures and tables. 

## D. S TREAM TRAP : Construction Details 

D.1. Data Sources 

The LILA BC repository hosts more than fifty datasets and continues to grow. As shown in Tab. A6, we limit the bench-mark to a subset of camera trap datasets, excluding non-camera-trap sources such as sea-animal imagery, drone im-agery, and geological or earth-observation images. 

D.2. Data Processing Pipeline 

The data processing pipeline is driven by a configuration file that specifies the target camera traps, the required fil-ters, and various other experimental settings. Based on this configuration, the pipeline first retrieves and preprocesses the raw data. 

Metadata preprocessing. All LILA BC camera trap datasets use the COCO camera trap format 1 metadata, which includes two optional fields—datetime and se-quence—that are essential for our benchmark to group im-ages into temporal intervals and to identify and handle burst images. When datetime is missing, we extract it from each image’s EXIF header 2 and insert it into the meta-data if available; when sequence is missing, we generate pseudo-sequences by grouping neighboring images within 3 seconds of one another; and when both fields are absent, we first recover datetime from EXIF and then apply the sequence-grouping step. The above metadata preprocessing is implemented as a separate script due to the large amount of image downloading and long processing time it requires; however, it can be incorporated into the pipeline in the fu-ture to automatically handle newly added datasets with the same COCO–camera trap format. 

> 1A metadata standard maintained within the LILA BC repository, de-rived from the original COCO format.
> 2EXIF stands for Exchangeable Image File Format, a standard for stor-ing metadata such as date and time inside image files.

5Figure A4. Detailed camera trap data processing pipeline. Raw camera trap images and metadata are filtered, temporally chunked, and cropped into standardized animal patches, producing per-camera chronological streams for online continual evaluation. 

MegaDetector bounding box. During the initial prepro-cessing phase, the pipeline also checks the bounding box predictions to ensure they align with the preprocessed meta-data. We use MegaDetector [4] v5a (MDv5a) as our unified detector across all datasets. MegaDetector evolves through multiple versions, each expanding its training corpus with both private and public camera trap datasets (e.g., Caltech Camera Traps [5], Snapshot Serengeti [46], WCS Camera Traps, NACTI [47], SWG Camera Traps [24]). MDv5a is trained on all MDv5b training data, along with addi-tional public datasets such as iNaturalist 2017 [51] and COCO [27]. Prior evaluations report strong performance: WildEye reports that MDv5a achieves 99.2% animal recall at 97.26% precision, and ecological studies consistently re-port 90–98% recall and 92–99% precision across diverse environments. Because several LILA BC datasets now include human-labeled bounding boxes (released after our benchmark preparation) and others still lack such annotations, we ap-ply MDv5a uniformly to all 17 datasets to ensure consistent preprocessing. For datasets without human-labeled boxes, we rely entirely on MDv5a detections; for those with hu-man labels, we still apply MDv5a with a high-confidence threshold for consistency. MDv5a outputs bounding boxes for animals, humans, and vehicles; we retain only animal detections and use metadata to link each bounding box to its species. Our goal is not to study detection itself but to build a consistent and reliable foundation for classification. 

Data processing. Once the initial data retrieval and metadata-detector matching are complete, the finalized data is passed through our processing pipeline, illustrated in Fig. A4. Applying the settings from the configuration file, the pipeline filters the data based on dataset or camera se-lection, minimum image count constraints, bounding-box confidence thresholds, and class exclusion for targeted taxa. Low-quality and other hard cases are filtered through these settings, enabling control over benchmark difficulty and data quality. This filtering step produces a substantial re-duction in both images and camera traps, as summarized in Tab. A6, with 80.1% of images and 88.9% of camera traps filtered overall. This is largely driven by the prevalence of empty images: approximately 41.7% contain no animals. Such cases naturally arise in camera trap systems, where motion triggers frequently activate after animals leave the scene or due to minor environmental disturbances. After removing non-informative images, the remaining valid data is grouped into temporal intervals, with a default window of 30-day chunks (adjustable to 15, 60, or custom durations). To ensure sufficient data for training and test-ing, we merge intervals when a chunk contains fewer than 200 images. Within each interval, the data is partitioned into training and testing sets. Crucially, this split is per-6Figure A5. Illustration of burst images from a single sequence. Upon detecting motion, the camera captures multiple frames in rapid succession, producing images that share the same environment, background, and animal appearance. 

formed while ensuring that burst images within the same sequence are kept in the same set to prevent temporal data leakage. While a fixed seed is not enforced by default, it can be specified to ensure reproducible splits, and rare class in-terval data may optionally be preserved alongside the train-ing and test sets to support long-tail evaluation. Finally, the pipeline crops the actual images. Following prior work, we enlarge each detected region by 50% of the bounding box size before cropping. The pipeline then saves the prepared interval JSON data alongside these cropped patches as the final benchmark output for each camera trap. The processed camera trap list is summarized in Tab. A7. 

D.3. One Trigger, Multiple Frames: Burst Images 

Camera trap devices capture bursts of images when mo-tion is detected, with each burst containing 3 to over 10 frames, which we refer to as a sequence . Using sequence IDs and frame-order metadata, we assign all frames from each sequence to a single split (train or test). As shown in Fig. A5, frames within a sequence are captured within seconds and depict the same animal, resulting in extremely high visual correlation. Splitting such frames across train and test would therefore introduce temporal leakage, artifi-cially inflating performance. To avoid this, we enforce strict sequence-level splitting. While splits are defined at the sequence level, each image is treated as an independent training and evaluation sample. We acknowledge that explicitly modeling intra-sequence correlations may further improve performance, but it is be-yond our current scope. Moreover, evaluating at the se-quence level, via single-frame downsampling or aggregat-ing predictions across sequences, could provide a more re-alistic setting. Quantifying the resulting dataset size reduc-tion and performance shifts remains an important direction for future work. 7Original Dataset STREAM TRAP 

Dataset Continent # Img # Cls # Traps # Img # Cls # Traps Caltech Camera Traps [5] N. America 243.1K 22 140 37.6K 13 15 Idaho Camera Traps [23] N. America 1535.7K 62 276 43.6K 10 15 NA Camera Trap Img [47] N. America 3280.8K 59 551 964.9K 20 52 NZ Trail Cam. Animals [33] Oceania 2045.8K 98 2469 543.9K 41 139 Orinoqu´ ıa Camera Traps [53] S. America 112.2K 58 49 20.1K 16 6Snapshot APNR* [35] Africa 228.4K 60 148 102.2K 19 40 Snapshot Camdeboo* [35] Africa 67.6K 48 59 22.9K 23 12 Snapshot Enonkishu* [35] Africa 132.8K 48 83 59.7K 23 13 Snapshot Karoo* [35] Africa 261.7K 48 96 21.2K 17 10 Snapshot Kgalagadi* [35] Africa 94.7K 48 132 23.6K 16 9Snapshot Kruger* [35] Africa 59.6K 59 124 5.8K 11 3Snapshot Madikwe* [35] Africa 277.5K 69 136 122.1K 28 28 Snapshot Mt. Zebra* [35] Africa 412.4K 59 74 15.4K 21 7Snapshot Pilanesberg* [35] Africa 108.7K 65 65 13.3K 19 3Snapshot Ruaha* [35] Africa 351.0K 54 47 4.6K 13 2Snapshot Serengeti [46] Africa 7178.4K 61 225 1308.4K 45 188 Wellington Cam. Traps [3] Oceania 270.5K 17 215 8.1K 7 4    

> Table A6. Summary of dataset statistics from the selected original LILA BC sources and S TREAM TRAP after applying the proposed data processing and filtering pipeline. Datasets marked with * indicate datasets grouped under the unified project Snapshot Safari 2024 Expansion [35]. Image counts are reported in thousands (K) with one-decimal precision.

8Table A7. Per-camera-trap statistics for all 546 camera traps in S TREAM TRAP , grouped by dataset. Each entry lists the camera trap ID, total image count, number of time intervals, and number of species classes. 

Name Images Int. Cls. Name Images Int. Cls. Caltech Camera Traps (15 camera traps) 23 1,749 8 7 57 3,951 11 7100 2,721 10 7 33 1,614 7 761 1,245 6 6 106 1,626 8 738 5,038 12 7 70 2,568 10 7114 4,896 10 9 43 1,903 8 776 3,376 11 6 115 1,437 6 846 2,463 10 7 88 1,755 8 8120 1,208 6 5

Idaho Camera Traps (15 camera traps) 84 2,545 7 7 94 2,048 8 6117 2,023 7 5 85 2,299 9 598 3,380 7 5 118 3,191 10 686 3,120 10 7 100 4,865 8 7121 4,427 11 6 87 1,692 7 5105 1,354 6 5 122 4,319 10 689 4,562 10 5 109 1,356 6 6124 2,430 6 8

NA Camera Trap Images (52 camera traps) archbold FL-01 51,120 12 5 archbold FL-43 5,116 8 6lebec CA-19 7,965 11 12 archbold FL-04 21,313 16 6archbold FL-44 2,776 9 6 lebec CA-20 20,483 14 11 archbold FL-05 30,121 14 8 lebec CA-01 5,867 11 11 lebec CA-21 4,270 12 13 archbold FL-09 48,065 10 8lebec CA-02 8,827 16 11 lebec CA-24 9,246 15 12 archbold FL-15 11,817 14 8 lebec CA-03 15,426 14 12 lebec CA-26 6,997 12 12 archbold FL-16 80,565 14 8lebec CA-04 14,661 17 12 lebec CA-27 13,616 15 12 archbold FL-19 42,460 14 7 lebec CA-05 2,929 13 11 lebec CA-29 34,320 16 10 archbold FL-20 22,038 14 6lebec CA-06 12,450 18 12 lebec CA-30 41,674 18 12 archbold FL-23 15,533 14 9 lebec CA-07 11,005 16 11 lebec CA-31 13,549 15 9 archbold FL-26 13,765 13 7lebec CA-09 5,597 15 11 lebec CA-32 3,730 9 9archbold FL-28 35,480 15 5 lebec CA-10 17,806 17 12 lebec CA-36 3,258 11 10 archbold FL-30 26,237 14 5lebec CA-11 13,471 14 12 lebec CA-37 27,415 15 10 archbold FL-31 35,364 15 6 lebec CA-12 11,502 14 10 lebec CA-38 22,459 18 13 archbold FL-37 16,756 11 8lebec CA-13 8,598 14 9 lebec CA-40 4,054 11 14 archbold FL-38 21,583 11 9 lebec CA-14 7,512 17 12 lebec CA-41 18,323 17 11 archbold FL-39 5,973 10 8lebec CA-16 3,811 12 12 lebec CA-45 12,950 10 10 archbold FL-41 21,502 11 6 lebec CA-17 34,437 19 11 archbold FL-42 8,783 9 5 lebec CA-18 30,290 18 10 

NZ Trail Cam Animals (139 camera traps) DWT BCAM419 2022 1 11,216 6 8 EFD DCAMH02 1,456 6 6EFH HCAME08 5,117 12 8 DWT BCAM668 2022 1 2,873 6 7EFD DCAMH04 1,179 6 9 EFH HCAME09 3,758 11 8EFD DCAMA02 1,683 7 7 EFD DCAMH06 3,924 12 9

Continued on next page. . . 

9Name Images Int. Cls. Name Images Int. Cls. 

EFH HCAME10 4,730 14 11 EFD DCAMA04 2,969 13 10 EFD DCAMH07 1,143 6 7 EFH HCAMF01 4,339 14 12 EFD DCAMA05 2,636 10 5 EFD DCAMH08 3,220 9 5EFH HCAMF02 9,138 19 17 EFD DCAMA06 2,736 11 8EFD DCAMH09 1,169 6 7 EFH HCAMF04 4,909 17 15 EFD DCAMA07 2,021 8 5 EFH HCAMA02 4,543 8 10 EFH HCAMF07 2,288 7 11 EFD DCAMA08 2,268 9 9EFH HCAMA03 2,612 7 8 EFH HCAMF09 9,324 21 17 EFD DCAMA10 1,310 6 11 EFH HCAMA05 6,954 10 7EFH HCAMF11 1,918 9 13 EFD DCAMA11 1,605 7 9EFH HCAMA06 6,065 10 10 EFH HCAMF12 2,310 9 11 EFD DCAMB02 3,577 12 11 EFH HCAMA07 5,350 13 7EFH HCAMG07 4,249 13 15 EFD DCAMB03 2,276 8 6EFH HCAMA09 8,531 10 6 EFH HCAMG08 2,416 11 10 EFD DCAMB04 2,115 6 7 EFH HCAMA10 5,290 8 10 EFH HCAMG10 2,298 9 9 EFD DCAMB06 2,645 8 6EFH HCAMA12 4,563 7 5 EFH HCAMG12 16,709 19 15 EFD DCAMB07 2,963 10 9 EFH HCAMA13 1,908 7 6EFH HCAMG13 4,044 16 16 EFD DCAMC02 2,422 9 8EFH HCAMB01 2,806 8 6 EFH HCAMG14 1,910 7 10 EFD DCAMC03 3,568 10 8 EFH HCAMB02 2,898 9 5EFH HCAMG15 3,676 12 14 EFD DCAMC04 3,378 7 8EFH HCAMB03 3,973 11 7 EFH HCAMH02 4,148 8 7EFD DCAMC05 1,861 6 6 EFH HCAMB04 5,767 13 5EFH HCAMH03 3,239 7 11 EFD DCAMC07 1,700 7 8EFH HCAMB05 2,086 7 8 EFH HCAMH04 4,209 8 9EFD DCAMC08 2,535 10 7 EFH HCAMB07 6,675 14 10 EFH HCAMH05 5,167 12 7 EFD DCAMC09 1,609 7 6EFH HCAMB08 6,292 12 12 EFH HCAMH06 6,766 12 10 EFD DCAMC10 2,933 10 9 EFH HCAMB09 4,124 12 11 EFH HCAMH07 2,429 7 5 EFD DCAMD02 2,648 10 10 EFH HCAMB10 3,024 7 9 EFH HCAMH08 3,779 8 7EFD DCAMD03 3,386 10 7 EFH HCAMB11 1,667 6 7EFH HCAMH09 2,356 6 9 EFD DCAMD04 3,238 11 7EFH HCAMC01 3,711 6 8 EFH HCAMI01 2,985 6 8EFD DCAMD06 3,185 11 9 EFH HCAMC02 5,822 11 7EFH HCAMJ01 4,264 9 6 EFD DCAMD07 3,164 11 11 EFH HCAMC03 7,002 11 6 EFH HCAMJ02 4,660 6 6EFD DCAMD08 1,421 6 8 EFH HCAMC04 7,950 12 10 EFH HCAMJ04 3,451 8 6 EFD DCAMD10 2,408 9 6EFH HCAMC06 5,657 12 9 EFH HCAMJ06 3,176 7 6EFD DCAMD11 1,591 7 7 EFH HCAMC07 6,136 13 10 HLO HPAT003 1,336 7 6 EFD DCAME01 2,734 11 13 EFH HCAMC08 3,137 7 9 HLO Moto2 2,257 9 6EFD DCAME02 2,664 6 10 EFH HCAMD01 3,048 6 8PS1 CAM6213 1,808 6 5 EFD DCAME03 3,920 13 13 EFH HCAMD03 2,382 8 5 PS1 CAM6604 1,698 7 5EFD DCAME04 2,922 11 13 EFH HCAMD04 6,641 12 12 PS1 CAM6803 3,567 7 6 EFD DCAME06 3,940 13 12 EFH HCAMD05 4,442 8 8 PS1 CAM6808 1,701 7 5EFD DCAME07 6,248 15 12 EFH HCAMD06 3,400 10 11 PS1 CAM7312 1,545 6 6 EFD DCAME08 6,165 14 12 EFH HCAMD07 5,754 11 10 PS1 CAM7709 2,103 6 5EFD DCAME09 2,169 7 10 EFH HCAMD08 4,996 13 12 PS1 CAM7811 2,955 6 6 EFD DCAMF02 1,414 6 8

Continued on next page. . . 

10 Name Images Int. Cls. Name Images Int. Cls. 

EFH HCAMD09 3,652 9 9 PS1 CAM7816 4,961 7 6EFD DCAMF03 6,737 18 12 EFH HCAMD10 2,178 6 9PS1 CAM7920 3,099 8 5 EFD DCAMF06 3,950 13 10 EFH HCAME02 11,502 16 10 PS1 CAM8001 1,823 6 7EFD DCAMF07 10,160 19 10 EFH HCAME03 11,811 15 9PS1 CAM8008 1,808 6 8 EFD DCAMF08 4,313 15 14 EFH HCAME04 8,765 15 12 PS1 CAM8306 1,342 6 5EFD DCAMF09 7,199 21 18 EFH HCAME05 4,372 10 6ZIO TRAILCAM01 5,918 6 5 EFD DCAMG03 2,576 11 6EFH HCAME06 3,061 11 8 EFD DCAMH01 1,394 6 8EFH HCAME07 5,113 14 8

Orinoqu´ ıa Camera Traps (6 camera traps) M00 2,028 6 11 N04 1,403 6 9N25 3,188 6 7 M04 5,931 6 7N07 1,759 6 7 N29 5,820 6 10 

Snapshot APNR (40 camera traps) 6U 2,081 10 8 K044 2,621 14 6TB17 5,461 15 12 13U 6,329 23 9K051 1,747 9 8 TB26 5,768 17 10 BOSP 1,759 6 6 K053 1,596 8 8U23A 1,429 7 8 JJ5 4,560 21 9K062 1,188 6 7 U24B 1,560 8 7JJ6 3,223 16 10 K064 2,097 10 7U43B 1,743 9 6 JJ7 3,229 17 8K082 2,042 11 9 U63C 3,108 14 8JJP 4,910 23 12 KUMH 1,297 6 6U64C 2,536 12 12 K011 1,837 9 7LL5 1,604 8 12 UMH8 1,846 9 9K013 2,322 12 6 N1 1,449 8 10 UMH9 3,691 18 10 K021 2,264 11 9N3 1,126 6 6 WB4 2,098 11 8K023 2,737 15 12 N5 1,450 7 9WM 2,201 11 6 K024 3,755 17 11 RM4 1,640 8 7 WS6 1,636 7 8K034 2,843 15 10 TB12 1,920 9 9K041 1,914 10 8 TB14 3,548 16 10 

Snapshot Camdeboo (12 camera traps) A05 2,924 11 10 B07 1,948 9 11 D03 2,901 12 8 A06 1,866 8 11 C06 3,226 12 9 D04 1,314 6 8B04 1,666 8 8 C07 1,626 8 13 D06 1,086 6 9 B06 1,374 7 11 D02 1,510 7 7 E02 1,461 6 8

Snapshot Enonkishu (13 camera traps) B02 1,855 6 10 C03 2,858 12 9D04 2,115 8 9 B03 1,358 8 7C04 6,271 16 14 D06 8,572 19 11 B05 4,869 10 13 C05 8,413 13 12 E06 7,247 17 10 B06 7,601 13 11 C06 3,123 11 13 C02 2,724 12 13 D01 2,710 12 14 

Snapshot Karoo (10 camera traps) A01 1,951 9 10 C01 4,647 15 11 

Continued on next page. . . 

11 Name Images Int. Cls. Name Images Int. Cls. 

E03 1,383 7 7 A02 2,533 12 11 D01 1,245 6 10 F03 1,349 6 11 B02 3,030 11 10 D04 1,538 8 11 B03 1,941 6 11 E01 1,540 8 9

Snapshot Kgalagadi (9 camera traps) KHOGA04 1,568 7 7 KHOGB06 3,118 11 9KHOLA03 2,158 7 7 KHOGB03 3,612 10 9KHOGB07 3,406 11 9 KHOLA05 2,805 10 5KHOGB04 1,847 7 7 KHOGC05 1,561 7 9KHOLA08 3,533 10 5

Snapshot Kruger (3 camera traps) 7 2,679 10 11 8 1,482 6 749 1,616 8 9

Snapshot Madikwe (28 camera traps) A03 2,064 9 7 D03 1,743 9 8I05 2,250 9 7 A04 1,886 9 9D04 1,304 7 8 I06 2,987 10 8A05 3,536 12 10 D07 3,699 15 9I08 1,347 7 10 A06 1,603 8 6F03 1,254 6 5 MAD01 10,599 11 15 B03 1,928 8 8 F04 1,515 7 7MAD03 21,236 10 14 B05 5,837 13 9G04 2,107 10 10 MAD04 10,580 11 15 B06 1,444 7 9 G05 1,481 7 7MAD05 4,488 11 12 C04 5,867 15 10 G08 1,757 8 8 MAD06 16,721 11 14 C06 6,992 14 8 H08 1,556 9 10 C07 2,522 11 8 I04 1,771 9 12 

Snapshot Mt. Zebra (7 camera traps) B04 1,230 6 7 D06 1,402 7 6F05 4,870 13 6 C08 1,691 9 11 E05 1,891 9 11 D03 2,472 11 17 F04 1,864 9 8

Snapshot Pilanesberg (3 camera traps) B04 4,555 11 12 C02 3,578 8 16 D01 5,182 11 12 

Snapshot Ruaha (2 camera traps) M2 2,824 8 12 M7 1,814 6 8

Snapshot Serengeti (188 camera traps) B03 7,120 21 14 G10 2,403 11 12 M09 16,681 30 21 B04 3,206 16 9G12 2,790 11 14 M13 3,924 10 10 B05 6,125 23 14 G13 1,586 6 6N02 2,177 6 10 B06 9,245 28 20 H01 8,037 29 17 N04 3,826 16 15 B07 19,353 24 13 H02 24,145 40 19 N05 7,955 23 15 B08 10,969 21 11 H03 5,021 26 14 N06 12,734 35 18 B09 7,194 16 8 H04 12,146 28 11 N08 10,528 27 16 B10 3,609 14 13 H05 19,184 39 15 N09 11,525 30 16 B12 1,805 8 11 H08 5,555 16 14 

Continued on next page. . . 

12 Name Images Int. Cls. Name Images Int. Cls. 

N10 7,505 8 14 B13 7,484 25 13 H09 1,715 9 9 N12 1,427 7 10 C01 20,361 26 14 H11 4,705 14 12 O04 2,403 8 12 C02 13,935 36 13 H13 5,488 15 15 O05 7,921 15 13 C03 6,346 20 13 I01 6,483 26 14 O06 9,362 33 18 C04 11,480 20 13 I02 7,109 30 18 O07 7,806 24 17 C05 9,558 21 14 I03 12,020 30 16 O08 6,279 19 17 C06 7,610 22 13 I04 8,834 32 12 O09 7,334 18 15 C07 13,071 23 14 I05 11,945 25 14 O10 8,033 22 13 C08 15,194 29 12 I06 7,830 23 12 O11 2,017 9 10 C10 7,380 16 13 I07 5,770 16 15 O13 2,247 7 7 C11 8,223 16 17 I08 3,845 15 16 P03 6,328 8 15 C12 8,509 20 8 I11 5,708 15 11 P04 3,629 9 13 C13 19,272 29 14 I12 2,778 13 14 P05 11,115 20 17 D02 16,352 32 13 I13 6,575 18 20 P06 7,446 18 14 D03 15,148 36 12 J01 1,346 7 11 P07 5,415 17 15 D04 10,382 31 14 J02 8,168 27 16 P09 7,397 13 8 D05 4,025 11 11 J03 11,000 30 17 P10 12,014 33 19 D06 12,254 19 16 J04 9,206 24 12 P11 2,556 9 14 D07 1,906 8 9J05 13,050 34 18 P13 7,626 20 12 D08 5,013 14 10 J06 8,182 23 10 Q04 2,188 8 12 D09 5,927 16 14 J07 2,361 10 11 Q05 4,947 19 15 D10 3,003 8 12 J08 3,286 16 16 Q06 5,622 17 12 D11 6,295 18 14 J09 7,166 25 17 Q07 6,497 23 14 D12 2,733 11 10 J10 3,946 13 15 Q08 7,799 25 14 D13 4,208 14 10 J12 9,840 28 19 Q09 2,981 8 15 E01 4,873 18 16 J13 2,907 12 13 Q10 1,807 9 10 E02 17,938 29 20 K03 11,493 29 17 Q11 4,503 16 9E03 13,175 36 18 K04 7,131 25 12 Q12 4,731 14 11 E04 15,297 38 15 K05 3,346 12 11 Q13 2,507 7 7E05 8,331 32 15 K06 11,903 24 13 R05 2,799 6 12 E06 11,219 19 17 K07 8,676 22 18 R06 5,058 13 13 E08 3,704 8 11 K08 3,380 15 12 R08 5,616 16 9 E09 7,750 21 21 K09 10,019 17 20 R09 8,602 23 12 E12 4,930 7 12 K10 2,183 10 9R10 3,431 6 11 E13 5,915 19 14 K11 1,311 7 10 R11 1,892 8 9F01 5,808 23 14 K12 1,435 6 6R12 3,548 10 7 F02 7,012 27 13 

Continued on next page. . . 

13 Name Images Int. Cls. Name Images Int. Cls. 

K13 4,340 6 12 S07 1,863 8 8F03 3,426 15 15 L02 1,170 6 8S08 1,763 10 12 F04 3,217 13 14 L03 4,556 16 12 S09 10,328 30 15 F05 9,555 16 17 L04 3,728 11 14 S10 4,918 13 8 F06 4,458 13 12 L05 10,006 18 17 S11 15,134 25 17 F07 2,679 13 10 L06 3,454 13 11 S13 3,507 11 12 F08 2,696 12 12 L07 4,852 15 13 T08 2,968 10 12 F09 2,009 7 15 L08 8,799 21 15 T09 3,808 15 14 F10 8,906 17 20 L09 2,934 9 12 T10 11,036 28 12 F12 2,963 9 13 L10 9,520 26 18 T11 13,764 28 16 F13 2,392 6 7L11 2,958 11 12 T12 8,805 21 10 G01 6,697 23 13 M02 1,118 6 11 T13 7,477 11 13 G02 9,028 27 17 M03 1,470 6 15 U09 8,125 17 14 G03 6,707 20 15 M04 4,319 14 14 U10 14,568 24 16 G04 8,262 27 13 M05 10,845 18 18 U12 3,735 12 9G05 7,356 20 14 M06 10,034 23 18 U13 4,340 9 17 G06 1,737 9 9M07 9,756 19 18 V10 6,393 15 14 G07 8,758 22 17 M08 8,176 22 12 

Wellington Camera Traps (4 camera traps) 031c 1,696 6 5 235 2,916 8 5046c 1,834 6 5 324 1,697 6 5

14 C1  C2  C3  C4  C5  C6  C7  C8  C9  C10  C11  C12  C13  C14  C15  C16  C17  C18  C19  C20  C21  C22  C23  C24  C25  C26  C27  C28  C29  C30  C31  C32  C33  C34  C35  C36  C37  C38  C39  Avg. ZS  94.1 97.7 81.3 94.5 75.8 81.5 85.6 80.1 81.2 62.7 79.3 75.3 69.5 87.2 82.6 76.5 92.3 77.9 80.2 82.1 66.0 58.3 64.1 77.1 79.1 85.3 72.0 67.6 69.6 79.0 84.3 63.2 56.3 79.7 90.9 75.5 90.9 75.8 55.8  77.6 Accum  63.2 73.6 56.0 72.9 57.0 50.0 75.7 60.0 73.0 60.6 76.0 66.0 66.0 75.1 68.0 68.0 77.1 73.0 74.0 72.0 11.4 16.7 26.0 25.0 25.0 26.3 20.0 25.0 16.7 33.3 33.3 39.7 33.3 27.1 50.0 38.0 53.6 42.5 45.7  49.9 

> ∆ 30.9 24.1 25.3 21.6 18.8 31.5  9.9  20.1  8.2  2.1  3.3  9.3  3.5  12.1 14.6  8.5  15.2  4.9  6.2  10.1 54.6 41.6 38.1 52.1 54.1 59.0 52.0 42.6 52.9 45.7 51.0 23.5 23.0 52.6 40.9 37.5 37.3 33.3 10.1  –Accum ⋆ 98.0 98.7 79.6 94.7 76.9 69.7 94.5 75.9 88.3 75.4 90.7 80.0 79.6 88.2 81.0 80.9 89.9 84.9 85.4 83.0 76.6 79.3 81.0 78.7 78.1 79.1 72.7 75.0 66.4 82.2 79.2 83.4 76.7 70.3 89.9 77.2 92.2 79.4 82.6  81.9
> ∆ 3.9  1.0  1.7  0.2  1.1  11.8  8.9  4.2  7.1  12.7 11.4  4.7  10.1  1.0  1.6  4.4  2.4  7.0  5.2  0.9  10.6 21.0 16.9  1.6  1.0  6.2  0.7  7.4  3.2  3.2  5.1  20.2 20.4  9.4  1.0  1.7  1.3  3.6  26.8  –Oracle ⋆ 96.1 98.7 84.9 96.5 84.3 82.2 90.0 81.6 91.0 89.7 92.1 82.4 78.7 90.3 87.8 87.0 96.4 91.6 87.8 86.8 83.9 81.4 89.9 82.0 84.0 87.7 79.8 85.0 87.0 86.9 91.5 84.7 89.9 87.9 94.5 81.3 95.8 83.3 93.4  87.8
> ∆ 2.0  1.0  3.6  2.0  8.5  0.7  4.4  1.5  9.8  27.0 12.8  7.1  9.2  3.1  5.2  10.5  4.1  13.7  7.6  4.7  17.9 23.1 25.8  4.9  4.9  2.4  7.8  17.4 17.4  7.9  7.2  21.5 33.6  8.2  3.6  5.8  4.9  7.5  37.6  –
> C40  C41  C42  C43  C44  C45  C46  C47  C48  C49  C50  C51  C52  C53  C54  C55  C56  C57  C58  C59  C60  C61  C62  C63  C64  C65  C66  C67  C68  C69  C70  C71  C72  C73  C74  C75  C76  C77  C78  Avg. ZS  77.5 78.3 81.0 86.1 83.0 78.9 62.2 81.5 80.9 78.3 66.0 67.1 73.8 56.9 89.1 74.7 83.1 69.8 61.5 59.8 70.1 72.2 80.4 66.7 71.4 64.7 89.0 76.6 58.6 85.7 81.6 60.6 61.8 70.4 67.0 70.8 78.4 79.3 74.8  73.6 Accum  50.0 45.0 36.8 46.7 54.2 50.0 61.7 56.7 72.3 56.2 45.0 66.7 50.0 50.0 71.7 54.0 62.5 60.8 58.0 64.3 68.2 72.3 71.0 54.3 63.9 56.9 62.3 70.9 66.6 90.0 96.7 79.2 64.2 65.7 61.4 75.8 71.5 79.3 67.5  63.4
> ∆ 27.5 33.3 44.2 39.4 28.8 28.9  0.5  24.8  8.6  22.1 21.0  0.4  23.8  6.9  17.4 20.7 20.6  9.0  3.5  4.5  1.9  0.1  9.4  12.4  7.5  7.8  26.7  5.7  8.0  4.3  15.1 18.6  2.4  4.7  5.6  5.0  6.9  0.0  7.3  –Accum ⋆ 86.2 81.0 71.8 79.4 86.4 78.3 88.9 83.4 87.2 77.7 66.5 86.9 70.1 70.0 90.8 71.8 79.5 75.4 71.3 75.7 79.4 83.3 83.5 81.6 72.6 65.3 86.6 77.9 68.7 82.1 81.5 87.6 84.2 86.8 61.5 79.8 88.5 89.3 76.7  79.4
> ∆ 8.7  2.7  9.2  6.7  3.4  0.6  26.7  1.9  6.3  0.6  0.5  19.8  3.7  13.1  1.7  2.9  3.6  5.6  9.8  15.9  9.3  11.1  3.1  14.9  1.2  0.6  2.4  1.3  10.1  3.6  0.1  27.0 22.4 16.4  5.5  9.0  10.1 10.0  1.9  –Oracle ⋆ 89.4 87.3 83.4 87.8 96.3 84.8 93.8 91.0 91.9 84.1 91.3 91.0 88.5 85.4 96.6 84.3 89.9 86.6 89.6 80.4 91.0 93.3 91.9 91.6 86.4 70.3 91.9 87.4 79.4 88.6 86.9 96.7 86.9 90.2 83.8 84.8 90.7 91.9 88.2  88.3
> ∆ 11.9  9.0  2.4  1.7  13.3  5.9  31.6  9.5  11.0  5.8  25.3 23.9 14.7 28.5  7.5  9.6  6.8  16.8 28.1 20.6 20.9 21.1 11.5 24.9 15.0  5.6  2.9  10.8 20.8  2.9  5.3  36.1 25.1 19.8 16.8 14.0 12.3 12.6 13.4  –
> C79  C80  C81  C82  C83  C84  C85  C86  C87  C88  C89  C90  C91  C92  C93  C94  C95  C96  C97  C98  C99  C100 C101 C102 C103 C104 C105 C106 C107 C108 C109 C110 C111 C112 C113 C114 C115 C116 Avg. ZS  66.7 75.6 63.6 82.4 79.8 71.2 82.0 84.7 73.9 71.9 75.6 88.3 90.2 87.7 89.9 86.8 89.6 92.8 87.7 74.8 88.0  91.3  91.9  93.4  93.4  78.9  84.6  95.8  93.9  95.9  98.0  96.3  93.3  97.3  94.1  90.7  94.0  95.8  86.4 Accum  64.8 79.0 56.0 78.5 75.8 61.8 75.5 83.5 65.4 66.2 73.3 83.2 78.1 88.3 82.7 69.1 84.7 88.0 72.2 69.5 77.0  70.8  83.0  81.0  78.0  84.5  81.1  71.4  82.0  76.8  81.3  53.6  62.3  89.4  90.4  78.2  64.2  81.7  75.8
> ∆ 1.9  3.4  7.6  3.9  4.0  9.4  6.5  1.2  8.5  5.7  2.3  5.1  12.1  0.6  7.2  17.7  4.9  4.8  15.5  5.3  11.0  20.5  8.9  12.4  15.4  5.6  3.5  24.4  11.9  19.1  16.7  42.7  31.0  7.9  3.7  12.5  29.8  14.1  –Accum ⋆ 77.3 70.0 33.4 90.3 88.4 81.5 88.1 85.5 61.6 78.2 80.4 90.9 94.4 90.8 92.5 84.8 93.2 92.8 87.0 74.2 90.2  92.5  88.1  93.8  94.2  91.1  86.0  96.7  93.1  95.9  98.9  95.8  92.9  97.7  90.2  88.1  92.0  95.1  87.0
> ∆ 10.6  5.6  30.2  7.9  8.6  10.3  6.1  0.8  12.3  6.3  4.8  2.6  4.2  3.1  2.6  2.0  3.6  0.0  0.7  0.6  2.2  1.2  3.8  0.4  0.8  12.2  1.4  0.9  0.8  0.0  0.9  0.5  0.4  0.4  3.9  2.6  2.0  0.7  –Oracle ⋆ 79.6 88.5 76.3 93.4 91.2 80.1 91.3 94.0 83.2 80.4 83.0 95.2 95.6 94.0 95.9 91.9 94.8 98.4 92.0 79.4 92.4  95.0  95.5  96.5  96.9  82.6  87.7  98.3  95.7  98.3  99.8  97.8  94.9  98.2  94.9  92.4  94.3  96.3  91.7
> ∆ 12.9 12.9 12.7 11.0 11.4  8.9  9.3  9.3  9.3  8.5  7.4  6.9  5.4  6.3  6.0  5.1  5.2  5.6  4.3  4.6  4.4  3.7  3.6  3.1  3.5  3.7  3.1  2.5  1.8  2.4  1.8  1.5  1.6  0.9  0.8  1.7  0.3  0.5  –
> Table A8. Complete result of ZS, Oracle ⋆, Accum, Accum ⋆. Blue (red) denotes improvement (degradation) relative to ZS.

15 Table A9. Camera trap index. Each camera trap is assigned an index Ci (e.g., C1, C2) used to reference camera traps in figures and tables throughout the paper. 

Index Dataset Camera Trap Index Dataset Camera Trap 

C1 Snapshot APNR 13U C59 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAMC07 C2 Snapshot APNR K082 C60 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAMB04 C3 Snapshot Serengeti Q09 C61 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFD DCAMB04 C4 Snapshot Mt. Zebra E05 C62 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFD DCAME09 C5 Snapshot Serengeti Q10 C63 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFD DCAMC05 C6 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAMI01 C64 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAMB07 C7 Caltech Camera Trap 88 C65 Orinoqu´ ıa Camera Traps M04 C8 Snapshot Serengeti K11 C66 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFD DCAMC03 C9 Snapshot Enonkishu C02 C67 Snapshot Kgalagadi KHOGC05 C10 Snapshot Kgalagadi KHOLA03 C68 Orinoqu´ ıa Camera Traps N29 C11 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAME09 C69 Snapshot Serengeti B04 C12 Snapshot Serengeti L10 C70 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFD DCAME03 C13 Snapshot Serengeti L06 C71 NZ Trail Cam. Animals PS1 CAM6213 C14 Snapshot Madikwe H08 C72 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAMD05 C15 Snapshot Serengeti D09 C73 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFD DCAMC04 C16 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAMD08 C74 Snapshot Serengeti C08 C17 NA Camera Trap Img lebec CA-19 C75 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAMC02 C18 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAME08 C76 Snapshot Madikwe A05 C19 Snapshot Serengeti H11 C77 Snapshot Madikwe D03 C20 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFD DCAMF06 C78 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAMF02 C21 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAMH03 C79 Snapshot Serengeti B10 C22 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAMB10 C80 Snapshot Serengeti I01 C23 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAMD10 C81 Snapshot Serengeti E09 C24 Snapshot Serengeti M13 C82 Snapshot Serengeti I11 C25 Snapshot Serengeti D12 C83 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAMD07 C26 Snapshot Serengeti L04 C84 Orinoqu´ ıa Camera Traps N25 C27 Snapshot Serengeti O04 C85 Snapshot Serengeti B03 C28 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAMH02 C86 NA Camera Trap Img lebec CA-20 C29 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAMA02 C87 Snapshot Serengeti G07 C30 Snapshot Serengeti U12 C88 Snapshot Serengeti O09 C31 NZ Trail Cam. Animals PS1 CAM7709 C89 Snapshot Serengeti I12 C32 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAMA09 C90 Wellington Camera Traps 031c C33 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAMC01 C91 Snapshot APNR K051 C34 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFD DCAME02 C92 Caltech Camera Trap 46 C35 Snapshot Madikwe G08 C93 Snapshot Madikwe B03 C36 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAMA05 C94 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAME05 C37 Snapshot Camdeboo E02 C95 Snapshot Karoo A01 C38 Orinoqu´ ıa Camera Traps N07 C96 Snapshot Madikwe D07 C39 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFD DCAMB02 C97 Idaho Camera Traps 122 C40 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFD DCAMC07 C98 Snapshot Serengeti L07 C41 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFD DCAME01 C99 Snapshot Serengeti O13 C42 Orinoqu´ ıa Camera Traps M00 C100 Snapshot Madikwe A04 C43 Snapshot Serengeti G13 C101 NA Camera Trap Img lebec CA-21 C44 NA Camera Trap Img lebec CA-16 C102 NA Camera Trap Img lebec CA-36 C45 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAMB09 C103 Snapshot Paarl Mtn. B04 C46 Snapshot Camdeboo B04 C104 Snapshot Serengeti O10 C47 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFD DCAMA02 C105 Snapshot Serengeti Q11 C48 Snapshot Serengeti E01 C106 Snapshot APNR U43B C49 Snapshot Serengeti E13 C107 Caltech Camera Trap 100 C50 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAMC06 C108 Idaho Camera Traps 85 C51 Snapshot Kgalagadi KHOLA08 C109 Snapshot Mt. Zebra F04 C52 Orinoqu´ ıa Camera Traps N04 C110 Snapshot Ruaha M7 C53 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAMD03 C111 Snapshot APNR K023 C54 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAMF12 C112 Caltech Camera Trap 70 C55 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAMA06 C113 Snapshot Enonkishu B02 C56 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFD DCAMA08 C114 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFD DCAMH07 C57 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAMC04 C115 Snapshot APNR N1 C58 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFH HCAMH04 C116 NZ Trail Cam. Animals EFD DCAMG03 

16