Title: A generative model for bipartite gene-sharing networks

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.13963v1

Published Time: Thu, 16 Apr 2026 01:05:47 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# A generative model for bipartite gene-sharing networks 

Jaime Iranzo 

Centro de Astrobiolog´ ıa (CSIC-INTA), 28864 Madrid, Spain Grupo Interdisciplinar de Sistemas Complejos (GISC), 28911 Legan´ es, Spain and Instituto de Biocomputaci´ on y F´ ısica de Sistemas Complejos (BIFI), Universidad de Zaragoza, 50018 Zaragoza, Spain 

Pedro J´ odar 

Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, Departamento de Matem´ aticas, 28911 Legan´ es, Spain and Grupo Interdisciplinar de Sistemas Complejos (GISC), 28911 Legan´ es, Spain 

Eugene V. Koonin 

Computational Biology Branch, Division of Intramural Research, National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20894, USA 

Susanna Manrubia 

Department of Biodiversity and Evolutionary Biology, Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales (CSIC), 28006 Madrid, Spain and Grupo Interdisciplinar de Sistemas Complejos (GISC), 28911 Legan´ es, Spain 

Jos´ e A. Cuesta ∗

Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, Departamento de Matem´ aticas, 28911 Legan´ es, Spain Grupo Interdisciplinar de Sistemas Complejos (GISC), 28911 Legan´ es, Spain and Instituto de Biocomputaci´ on y F´ ısica de Sistemas Complejos (BIFI), Universidad de Zaragoza, 50018 Zaragoza, Spain 

(Dated: April 16, 2026) Gene-sharing networks provide a powerful framework to study the evolution of viruses and mobile genetic elements. These bipartite networks, which link genes to the genomes that contain them, exhibit characteristic degree distributions: a scale-free distribution for genes and an exponential-like decay for genomes. Here, we propose a mechanistic model that explains these patterns through fun-damental evolutionary processes including horizontal gene transfer, capture of new genes, emergence of new genomes, and gene loss. Using a mean-field approximation, we derive analytical expressions for the asymptotic gene and genome degree distributions, recapitulating a power-law distribution for genes and an exponential distribution for genomes. Numerical simulations validate these predic-tions and yield parameter values that closely fit empirical data from dsDNA viruses, RNA viruses, and prokaryotic pangenomes. This simple model with only two parameters provides a generative framework for bipartite gene-sharing networks, offering qualitative and quantitative insights into the main evolutionary forces driving genome plasticity. Setting the gene loss rate to zero, the gene and genome degree distributions of the model closely fit the empirically observed distributions. Thus, evolution of viruses appears to be dominated by gene gain, in agreement with the results of independent reconstructions of viral evolution. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Evolution of the genomes of prokaryotes and viruses is a highly dynamic process that is shaped by extensive gene gain, primarily, via horizontal gene transfer (HGT), and gene loss [1–5]. Gene-sharing networks have proven a useful framework to study these evolutionary processes. Unlike traditional phylogenetic approaches, gene-sharing networks do not rely on high-quality alignments of uni-versal marker genes and therefore are particularly useful for investigating deep evolutionary connections among viruses and mobile genetic elements (MGE) [6–8]. For many practical applications, gene-sharing networks take  

> ∗cuesta@math.uc3m.es

the form of bipartite graphs [9], that is, graphs with two classes of nodes, one representing families of orthologous genes and the other representing genomes [10]. In bipar-tite gene-sharing networks, links connect each genome with all the gene families present in that genome, and consequently, each gene family is connected with all the genomes in which it is represented. Compared to other representations of cross-genome similarity, bipartite net-works preserve all available information about gene shar-ing patterns. As a result, they can be used to infer gene exchange across genomes, identify conserved subgenomic elements, such as defense systems or transposons, and classify genomes based on their gene content [11]. Bipartite gene-sharing networks in DNA and RNA viruses are characterized by two major structural prop-erties: modularity and hierarchy [6]. The modules of the 

> arXiv:2604.13963v1 [q-bio.PE] 15 Apr 2026

2network correspond to groups of viruses that share sig-nificantly more genes among themselves than they share with viruses outside the given module. From an evolu-tionary perspective, shared genes within a module most likely result from common ancestry, although some ho-mologs might have been acquired by different viruses in-dependently. The hierarchical organization of the net-work likely reflects a tree-like trend in virus diversifi-cation, which is detectable despite pervasive gene ex-change. In support of this interpretation, the modules of the gene-sharing network agree well with the taxonomy of viruses that was constructed, primarily, on the basis of combined phylogenies of viral hallmark genes, with the lowest level of modules roughly corresponding to viral genera [8, 12]. This correspondence between the struc-ture of gene-sharing networks and viral taxonomy has fu-eled the development of network-based tools for unsuper-vised virus classification, which are especially crucial and promising to deal with huge numbers of viral genomes assembled from metagenomic data [13]. Besides these applications, bipartite gene-sharing networks provide an opportunity to investigate the forces and trends underly-ing the evolution of viral genomes. Network architecture and the dynamical processes that shape it are deeply in-terconnected [14]. In the case of bipartite gene-sharing networks, statistical properties of the network, such as the node degree distributions of genomes and gene fami-lies, contain information about the relative rates of gene gain and loss, and the rates of emergence and extinction of viral species as well as higher taxa mapping to the network modules. The idea of examining gene frequencies to discrimi-nate between different models of genome evolution dates back, at least, to the seminal works on transposon dy-namics conducted in the 1980’s and early 1990’s (e.g. [15–18]). Since then, the systematic study of gene fam-ily sizes within and across prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes has shed light on fundamental aspects of gene and genome evolution. In particular, by fitting mathe-matical models of gene diversification to empirical distri-butions of gene family sizes, Huynen and Van Nimwegen [19], and subsequently, in a refined analysis, Karev et al. [20, 21] provided evidence of a balance between domain innovation, duplication, and loss rates, together with self-accelerated gene diversification. Regarding genome size and composition, generalized birth-and-death mod-els have been combined with empirical data to demon-strate that genome shrinking is a non-adaptive trend in most prokaryotic lineages and the long-term maintenance of slightly beneficial genes requires a minimum rate of horizontal gene transfer [22–24]. Empirical gene-sharing networks display a number of appealing regularities suggestive of dominating, under-lying generative processes. Both for RNA and DNA viruses, the gene-degree distribution (that is, the number of genomes that contain a given gene family) is compat-ible with a power-law distribution, whereas the genome-degree distribution (the number of gene families repre-sented in a given genome) is a fast-decaying, exponential-like function [6]. In all cases analyzed, gene-sharing net-works display a modular structure that recapitulates viral taxa [6–8, 13]. Although power-law distributions for gene and do-main family sizes have been widely reported and ana-lyzed [19, 25–27], models of gene family expansion able to generate such power laws do not generally consider the concomitant dynamics of genome size. The sizes of gene families and genomes are intimately related, given that genomes are the only environment in which individ-ual genes can thrive. Genomes better represent organ-isms than any particular gene family and are subject to different selective pressures that, in turn, should affect the evolutionary dynamics of genes and gene families. Popular network models that generate power-law degree distributions, such as the Barab´ asi-Albert preferential at-tachment model [28, 29], assume an infinite external pool of isolated elements that are sequentially linked to preex-isting elements of the same kind (monopartite networks). Generative models for bipartite networks have not been explored in detail and, to the best of our knowledge, cur-rently, there is no generative model applicable to gene-sharing networks. Here we jointly model the evolution of genome and gene family sizes. Our goal is to develop generative models for bipartite networks with properties compati-ble with those observed in the virus gene-sharing net-works. By studying genome size and gene spread un-der the same unified framework, we conclude that, at odds with genomes of cellular life forms, the structure of viral gene-sharing networks implies that gene gain domi-nates over gene loss, a conclusion that is compatible with empirical evolutionary reconstructions for several major groups of viruses. We extend the model to prokaryotic pangenomes and show that accessory gene-sharing net-works are also subject to an expansion bias. Finally, we demonstrate that genome expansion is not an artifact of the bipartite generative network model.  

> II. MECHANISTIC MODEL

The mechanistic model we devised includes fundamen-tal processes that are well documented in viral evolution: 

Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) Genes in the net-work can be transferred from genome to genome. The higher the abundance of a gene among genomes, the greater the probability that such a gene undergoes HGT, so it seems plausible to assume the likelihood of such an event to be proportional to the abundance of the gene. 

Functional innovation (FI) New genes, originated in an external and—to all purposes—unlimited pool, can be incorporated into a genome via HGT. 

Organismal innovation (OI) With a certain probabil-ity, a gene undergoing HGT founds a new genome, rather than joining an existing one. Although the birth of a new genome from a single gene may appear an oversimplifi-3cation, it becomes reasonable under the assumption that the rates of gain, loss, and exchange of core genes are neg-ligible and, therefore, these genes do not fall within the scope of the model. Thus, every genome includes a set of essential genes for which evolution is not explicitly mod-eled (for example, the conserved morphogenetic toolbox in DNA viruses or the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase in RNA viruses). Accordingly, the emergence of a new genome can be perceived as capture of a new gene on top of that immutable core. 

Gene loss (GL) Genomes lose genes at a constant rate. Gene loss can result from the accumulation of point mutations and small indels, leading to pseudogenization and, eventually, genome erosion, and also from recombi-nation events leading to large deletions. For the purpose of this model, we combined both mechanisms under a single overall gene loss rate. These processes can be translated into a set of dynam-ical rules that generate a bipartite network (Figure 1). The network emerges through the following dynamical processes: (1) At a certain rate—which we set to 1 to fix the time scale—a random gene in the network under-goes HGT. Among all of them, gene i is selected with a probability pi proportional to its degree ki,namely, pi = ki/ P 

> j

kj (Fig. 1a, c). (2) With a probability α, a new gene from the external pool is added to the system (Fig. 1b, d). (3) Regardless of whether the gene is old (process 1) or new (process 2), with probability 1 − β it gets linked to a randomly picked genome (Fig. 1a, b) or founds a new genome with probability β; by model construction, in the latter case the new genome will contain this gene only (Fig. 1c, d). In the former case, it may happen that the selected gene is al-ready present in the selected genome (they are al-ready linked); then, this step is skipped. (4) With probability ϵ, one link of the network cho-sen at random is removed, Fig. 1e. This represents a genome losing a gene. If, as a result, the gene and/or genome involved lose all their links, they are removed from the network.  

> III. MEAN-FIELD APPROXIMATION

Although the model above is easy to implement and simulate computationally, a comprehensive study of the parameters involved is costly. Therefore, before attempt-ing systematic, numerical explorations of the parameter space, we sought to gain insight into the gene-sharing network evolution through a formal, mean-field approx-imation. This analysis sheds light on the general func-tional forms of the gene and genome degree distributions, and provides for deriving algebraic relationships between model parameters and average quantities measured in the various data sets that will be subsequently analyzed. To further simplify the analytical treatment, we initially set 

ϵ = 0 and subsequently explore numerically the effect of a positive deletion rate. The consistency of this assump-tion will be assessed later, and an upper bound for ϵ will be derived from numerical simulations.  

> A. Network growth

The number of nodes in the bipartite network increases at a constant rate: α for genes, β(1 + α) for genomes. Thus, on average, the number of genes and the number of genomes at time step t, are given by Ng (t) = Ng (0) + αt ,and NG(t) = NG(0) + β(1 + α)t, respectively. We will henceforth assume Ng (0) = NG(0) = 1 for simplicity. At every time step new links can be created through the processes described in the previous section. The ad-dition of a new gene adds a link at a rate α, regardless of whether that gene joins a pre-existing genome (Fig. 1b) or a new genome (Fig. 1d); a pre-existing gene links to a new genome at a rate β (Fig. 1c). In contrast, linking existing genes to existing genomes (Fig. 1a) does not add new links at a constant rate because the outcome of such events depends on whether the gene is already present in the chosen genome. For the time being, let us call Pf (t)the probability that the link is formed, so that the rate of creation of new links through this process is (1 − β)Pf (t). Taking the sum of all possibilities, the mean number of links L(t) at time step t fulfills 

dL dt = α + β + (1 − β)Pf (t), (1) with L(0) = 1. Assuming Pf (t) → P∞ as t → ∞ , the long-term solution to this equation behaves as 

L(t) ∼ α + β + (1 − β)P∞

t. (2) The precise value of P∞ will be explicitly obtained later.  

> B. Degree distribution of genes

Let us call gk(t) the probability that a gene is contained in k genomes at time t (that is, the probability that a gene node has degree k in the bipartite network). To derive the master equation for this function, we need to estimate the probability that a gene of degree k forms a new link in the next time step. For this to happen, the gene has to be chosen, which occurs with a probability proportional to kg k(t), i.e., the number of links belonging to genes of degree k, normalized over L(t) = P 

> k

kg k(t). Then, with probability β, this gene creates a new genome, and with probability 1 − β it links to an extant genome, provided the gene is not already contained in it. Because the gene is already present in k genomes out of NG(t), the mean-field estimate for the probability of the latter event is 4           

> FIG. 1. Sketch of the bipartite network and main quantities and mechanisms included in the gene-sharing model. Left: The degree kiof a gene is the number of genomes that contain gene i(examples are shown for two genes in the network), while the degree of a genome (its size) corresponds to its number of genes. The probability that a gene or a genome has degree kat time
> tis given by distributions gk(t) and Gk(t), respectively. The initial condition of the process is the simplest bipartite network, consisting of one gene, one genome, and a single link between them. Panels (a)-(e) illustrate the possible events occurring at each time step, which mimic the fundamental processes shaping viral genome evolution. (a) pure HGT with gene and genome conservation; (b) addition of a new gene from an external pool to the existing ensemble of genomes; (c) organismal innovation through a new combination of pre-existing genes; (d) organismal innovation via incorporation of novel genes; and (e) gene loss, which occurs independently of genome age or size and may occasionally reduce the total number of genes or genomes.

1 − k/N G(t). Finally, new genes with one link emerge at a rate α. The terms corresponding to all these processes are included in the master equation ( k ≥ 1) ˙gk =  E−1 − 1 kL(t)



1 − (1 − β) kNG(t)



gk +αδ k, 1, (3) using the shift operator E, defined as Esf (k) ≡ f (k + s)for every integer s; δk,j = 1 if k = j and 0 otherwise. The presence of the operator E−1 − 1 means that every time a gene of degree k − 1 creates a new link, gk−1(t)decreases by one and gk(t) increases by one. From this equation we can obtain (see ‘Materials and methods’) the mean-field estimate of the probability of link formation (that is, the probability that a gene is not present in the genome that has been selected for the gene to link to) 

Pf (t) = 1 − 1

L(t)NG(t)

X

> k≥1

k2gk(t). (4) For sufficiently small deletion rate ϵ, the number of genes, genomes and links in the network grows indefi-nitely, so the system does not reach a stationary state. However, it can be expected that gk(t) ∼ Ng (t)pk, as 

t → ∞ , with pk independent of t. In this limit, (4) yields 

P∞ = 1 implying that, after a transient, the event repre-sented in Fig. 1a is always successful. On the other hand, in this same limit the master (3) leads to (see ‘Materials and Methods’) 

pk = (1 + α)Γ(2 + α) (k − 1)! Γ( k + 2 + α)

∼ (1 + α)Γ(2 + α)k−2−α (k → ∞ ).

(5) The gene degree distribution decays as a scale-free, power law function with exponent 2+ α. This observation allows us to obtain α from empirical data. The long-term limit of the gene degree distribution cor-responds to Yule’s [30] (or Yule-Simon’s [31]) distribu-tion, (5). Yule originally derived it in a continuous-time birth process to explain the distribution of the number of species per genus. In our framework, the number of links grows as dL/dt = 1 + α, so Yule’s model applies di-rectly in the long-time limit. As in Yule’s original formu-lation, transient effects depend on the initial condition; such transients have been analyzed in related birth-death models for family-size distributions [32]. The same dis-tribution is also recovered for specific parameter choices in the Barab´ asi-Albert model of preferential attachment [28]. Yule’s distribution, (5), yields an asymptotic average degree 

⟨k⟩g = 1 + αα5for any α > 0. The variance of the distribution, however, is finite only for α > 1. Accordingly, for 0 < α < 1, large fluctuations in the average value of the gene degree for any finite system should be expected. Note that a finite average degree is consistent with P∞ = 1, given that the number of genes and genomes grows linearly with time. Also, the fact that the ratio 

Ng (t)

NG(t) → αβ(1 + α)becomes asymptotically independent of time indirectly supports our proposition regarding a stationary func-tional shape for the degree distributions (and, by exten-sion, for any other structural property of the bipartite network).  

> C. Degree distribution of genomes

The master equation for the degree distribution of genomes is easier to derive. If Gk(t) denotes the number of genomes that have degree k at time t, the probabil-ity that one such genome is chosen for HGT is simply 

Gk(t)/N G(t). As the rate at which new links are formed is α + β + (1 − β)Pf (t), and new genomes are founded at rate β(1 + α), the master equation turns out to be (k ≥ 1) ˙Gk = α + β + (1 − β)Pf (t)

NG(t)

 E−1 − 1 Gk + β(1 + α)δk, 1,

with the assumption G0(t) ≡ 0. As Pf (t) → 1 when t → ∞ , assuming (as in the case of genes), that in this limit Gk(t) ∼ NG(t)qk, with qk inde-pendent of time, the master equation becomes a simple iteration, whose solution is just 

qk = β

 11 + β

k

. (6) The value of β follows from fitting the exponential distri-bution to empirical data. In the mean-field approxima-tion, the asymptotic degree distribution of genomes is a decaying exponential with average and finite variance 

⟨k⟩G = 1 + ββ , Var G(k) = 1 + ββ2 .

Notice that, though the dynamics of genes and genomes are mutually coupled and quantities such as the number of genomes grow at a rate that depends both on α and 

β, the two parameters of the model independently affect one or another degree distribution, asymptotically.  

> IV. MODULARITY AND CORRELATIONS

The analysis above shows that the combination of three simple mechanisms (HGT, functional innovation, and or-ganismal innovation) is sufficient to generate the empir-ical degree distribution of genes and genomes. However, this analysis cannot determine whether the model in-duces significant correlations between pairs of nodes (for example, degree-degree correlations). Such correlations are characteristic of natural gene-genome bipartite net-works: gene sharing is not equally likely among genomes, and genomes share genes above random expectations, re-sulting in the modularity observed in networks of DNA [6] and RNA viruses [8]. In terms of the network or-ganization, modularity and correlations represent differ-ent ways of quantifying an underlying architectural fea-ture—namely, the extent of overlap between the neigh-borhoods of genes or genomes—that measures deviations from a random assignment of links. In order to quantify the overlap between pairs of genes or pairs of genomes, we will use a measure introduced in [33] aimed at capturing the degree of nestedness in mono-and bipartite networks. The definition is as follows. Consider two empirical degree distributions, each cor-responding to one of the node types in a bipartite net-work; in our case, these could be the distributions for genes and genomes obtained from our data sets or simu-lations of the mechanistic model with fixed parameters. In [33], it is shown that the null model for a network with those distributions yields a value of overlap 

π0 = Ng (t)⟨k2

> G

⟩ + NG(t)⟨k2 

> g

⟩⟨kg ⟩⟨ kG⟩(Ng (t) + NG(t)) 2 ,

using the nomenclature of our model. This value of over-lap corresponds, therefore, to a configuration model[34] [35] with the empirically measured gene and genome de-gree distributions. The overlap has a local definition for each pair of nodes 

{i, j } (regardless of whether they are of the same or dif-ferent type), ˜πij = (A2)ij 

kikj

,

where A is the adjacency matrix of the bipartite graph. The square of the adjacency matrix reveals why this is a measure of overlap (or similarity) between nodes, because 

A2 is the number of walks of length two from node i to node j. Considering that in bipartite networks there are no links between nodes of the same class (between pairs of genes or pairs of genomes), this is the number of genomes where a pair {i, j } of genes is simultaneously present, or conversely, the number of genes shared by a pair {i, j } of genomes. The network overlap is the average over all node pairs, ˜π = 1

N 2

X

> ij

˜πij ,

with N = Ng (t)+ NG(t), and the relative overlap is finally defined as 

π ≡ ˜ππ0

. (7) 6Time (t)                                   

> No. links (scaled)
> 110 210 4
> 1
> 10 2
> 10 4
> α= 0.7; β= 0.1
> L = (1 + α) t
> α= 0.4; β= 0.01
> FIG. 2. Evolution of the number of links in numerical simu-lations with ϵ= 0 (blue curves). The gray dashed line rep-resents the asymptotic expectation in Eq. (2). The transient before reaching the asymptotic behavior, approximately in-dicated with triangular markers, is significantly longer with smaller values of αand β, consistent with the fact that the initial condition is farther from the asymptotic average value of the degree distribution ( ⟨k⟩g≃3.5 and ⟨k⟩G≃100 with
> α= 0 .4 and β= 0 .01 vs ⟨k⟩g≃2.4 and ⟨k⟩G≃11 with
> α= 0 .7 and β= 0 .1). To make all curves comparable, the number of links was scaled by a factor (1 + α)−1.

A notable property of this definition is that it corrects for heterogeneous degree distributions, which inherently induce positive nestedness (positive overlap) in finite net-works [33]. Thus, if π is significantly different from 1, there are degree-degree correlations beyond those caused by heterogeneous degree distributions. We measured this quantity for the analyzed data sets and for simulations of the model that best fit the data, and the resulting overlap values were compared (see below).  

> V. GENE-SHARING NETWORKS FOR VIRUSES AND PROKARYOTES

We analyzed gene-sharing networks for three data sets: dsDNA viruses [6], RNA viruses [8] and prokaryotic pangenomes, for which the bipartite network was recon-structed in this work. The characteristics of all networks are summarized in Table I. In the case of dsDNA viruses, the two classes of nodes correspond to orthologous gene families and vi-ral genomes. The dataset included all families of ds-DNA viruses known at the time of our previous analysis [6] and some related mobile genetic elements. Beyond an emerging modular structure that largely reflected ac-cepted taxa, it was shown that the degree distribution for gene families was compatible with a power-law with an exponent close to −2, while that of viral genomes was much flatter and considered to be roughly uniform. Two different bipartite networks were generated from this dataset: (i) a network consisting of all orthologous gene families (including singletons and highly divergent genes), denoted ‘dsDNA all’, and (ii) a core network in which only genes with a loss rate below unity were re-tained, denoted ‘dsDNA core’ (see [6] for details). RNA virus gene sharing networks were constructed in [8]. In this case, gene nodes correspond to protein do-mains identified from a representative ensemble of RNA virus genomes (see Materials and Methods) As for the dsDNA core network, the data was filtered in order to retain only evolutionarily informative genes, as in the original publications. Finally, we analyzed a network reconstructed from the pangenomes of 125 bacterial and archaeal species ana-lyzed in [36]. The pangenome network was built by con-necting each gene family to all the pangenomes in which it is present (see Materials and Methods).  

> VI. COMPARISON OF GENE AND GENOME DEGREE DISTRIBUTIONS FOR MODEL-PREDICTED, SIMULATED AND EMPIRICAL GENE-SHARING NETWORKS

An assumption of our mean-field approximation was that the number of links in a network grows linearly with time (2). Analytical results indicate that this assumption is self-consistent, and simulations confirm an asymptot-ically linear increase in the number of links (Figure 2). These simulations further reveal a transient regime, the duration of which depends on the model parameters. The variable length of these transients suggests that natural systems might lie at different distances from the long-time limit, depending on their initial conditions and the parameters that govern their dynamics. To explore the regions of the {α, β } plane where the degree distributions fit well the model predictions, we conducted numerical simulations of the model across a broad range of parameter values and compared the re-sulting degree distributions with empirical ones. The op-timal values of α and β were determined by minimizing the overall least-squares error between simulated and em-pirical degree distributions (see Materials and Methods). Figure 3 summarizes the results of fitting empirical data with simulation results for the four networks. All probability distributions show a good agreement with nu-merical results for a pair of {α, β } values (see Table I). For comparison, we also show fits to the degree distri-butions used by fitting their asymptotic forms, Eqs. (5) and (6); these values are given in the upper part of Table I. Gene degree distributions are in all cases remarkably close to their asymptotic shape, although some deviations are apparent for the smaller, noisier networks (especially those for RNA viruses). Genome degree distributions are also noisier because of their smaller sizes; however, devi-ations from the expected asymptotic exponential shape only stand out for the RNA virus network. The model parameter values do not need to be fine-tuned to fit empirical data. Indeed, relatively broad re-gions of the parameter space yield nearly optimal fits to the data (Fig. 4). Notably, however, these regions do not overlap for different datasets, suggesting that the pro-cesses of gene and genome innovation run at substantially 7Raw degree distribution                   

> Binned degree distribution
> Best fit to model
> Stationary distribution
> Genome degree 0400 800 10 -4
> 10 -2
> 050 100 Genome degree 10 -4
> 10 -6
> 10 -1
> 10 -2
> 010 30 20 Genome degree 10 -3
> 10 -4
> 10 -1
> 10 -2
> 02000 4000 Pangenome degree 10 -4
> 10 -5
> 10 -2
> 10 -3
> PDF
> 10 2110
> 10 -4
> 10 -8
> 1Gene degree 10 2110
> 10 -4
> 10 -6
> 110 -2
> Gene degree 10 2110 4
> 10 -4
> 10 -8
> 1Gene degree 10 2110
> 10 -2
> 10 -4
> 1Gene degree PDF
> dsDNA virus (all) dsDNA virus RNA virus Pangenome
> 10 310 3

FIG. 3. Degree distributions of real-world gene-sharing networks and fits to the model. Best fits were obtained by minimizing the total squared deviation between the binned empirical distributions and Monte Carlo simulations of the model, except in the case of the pangenome network, that was directly fitted using the analytical expression for the stationary distribution. Fitting parameters are given in Table I. 

different rates in each case (see Discussion). Table I compares the results of fitting data to the asymptotic degree distributions (upper section) with the model parameters that provide the best fit to the empiri-cal data (lower section). Remarkably, the values of α and 

β obtained through these two approaches are closely sim-ilar. The negative values of α observed for the dsDNA core and RNA networks warrant discussion. By construc-tion, the model does not permit negative α values, yield-ing instead small positive ones in both cases. However, nothing prevents negative values when (5) is fitted di-rectly to the data. It is also worth noting that the RNA network exhibits a systematic downward curvature, indi-cating that fits over different regions would produce dis-tinct exponent values. Simulations better capture such deviations from linearity, which reflect the transient dy-namics preceding the asymptotic regime. Overall, the model—with only two parameters— captures the central trends in the data and explains >95% of the variance of the gene degree distributions and 45-90% of the variance of the genome degree distributions. It is noteworthy, however, that the simulated net-works were two to three times larger than the empirical ones. We believe this discrepancy arises because the for-mer include all nodes and links generated by the model, whereas empirical networks represent only a partial sam-pling of a much larger pool of genomes (in other words, the genomes included in the dsDNA and RNA virus net-works only cover a limited, and actually, small fraction of all extant viruses, and the same applies to pangenomes). To test this explanation, we repeated the measurements using subsamples of the simulated networks with sizes comparable to those of the empirical data. We found that the degree distributions of the subsampled networks did not differ substantially from those of the complete networks (Fig. S1). Thus, we can conclude that partial networks obtained from a random subset of genomes are informative about the structure of the complete network. The values of the overlap π are also informative. As expected, the model yields values close to 1, consistent with the lack of correlations in link assignment inherent to the model design. In contrast, the dsDNA all, dsDNA core, and RNA networks display significantly higher val-ues, reflecting the clustering previously identified in these networks. The pangenome network, however, shows ran-dom overlap among nodes. Because only one species per genus was included in this network, we interpret such lack of correlations as a consequence of massive turnover of accessory genes throughout the evolution of bacterial genera, leading to gene sharing patterns that are com-patible with random assignment of links. All the above results were obtained in the limit of no gene loss, ϵ = 0. Although degree distributions were well fit in this limit, the resulting networks contained many more links than the empirically observed networks (Table I). As discussed above, this discrepancy can be attributed to the implicit sampling of genomes in empir-ical networks and disappears if the simulated networks are equally sampled. Analytical derivations of network growth and degree distributions with nonzero gene loss (ϵ > 0) are not feasible; therefore, we resorted to simu-lations to investigate the effect of gene loss. We did not observe significant differences in the fits even if α and β

were fixed (Fig. 5). Gene degree distributions were min-imally affected, which is to be expected considering that these distributions emerge from a multiplicative process (preferential attachment) whereas gene loss is an addi-tive process. In genome degree distributions, the shape 8𝛼 

## 𝛽        

> 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
> 10 -3
> 10 -2
> 10 -1
> 1
> dsDNA virus (all)
> dsDNA virus
> RNA virus
> Pangenome
> FIG. 4. Regions of the parameter space that provide a good fit to the empirical networks (total squared deviation less than twice the minimum value). The regions of parameters that fit each empirical gene-sharing network are non-overlapping, hinting at dynamical processes occurring at significantly dif-ferent rates for the systems analyzed. 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> FIG. 5. Effect of gene loss on the gene and genome degree distributions. While gene degree distributions are barely af-fected by gene loss, genome degree distributions shorten their range and the fit to data worsens. Data correspond to the core dsDNA virus network.

of their rightmost tail changed, showing faster decay the larger the value of ϵ, deviating from observations. Thus, the rate of gene loss apparently should take values ϵ ≲ 0.1to fit real data.  

> VII. DISCUSSION

We propose here that the architecture of bipartite gene-sharing networks is rooted in two dynamical pro-cesses: HGT of genes proportional to their abundance in the genome ensemble and innovation, be it due to the capture of new genes or to the emergence of new minimal genomes. This conjecture is supported by an-alytical and numerical results obtained with our gener-ative model for gene sharing networks that, with only two free parameters—probability of a new gene capture (α) and probability of a new genome emergence ( β)— successfully recovers the observed degree distributions of genes and genomes. We derived analytical expressions for these distributions evolving in the long term and show, by comparison with numerical simulations, that despite the transient nature and limited size of the empirical net-works, they can be well approximated by the asymptotic forms of the degree distribution. The analytical expres-sions for the node degree distributions were obtained un-der the no gene loss assumption. However, numerical investigation of the effect of gene loss showed that this process had a limited effect on the main statistical prop-erties of gene sharing networks even at relatively high loss rates. Nevertheless, to obtain degree distributions that qualitatively agreed with those of the empirical net-works, gene loss rates must remain lower than gain rates. This finding suggests a fundamental distinction between the evolution of prokaryotic genomes, which is driven, in large part, by the intrinsic bias towards gene loss that can be counter-balanced by gene gain under selection for functional diversification [3, 4, 22, 24, 37, 38], and the evolution of prokaryotic pangenomes and viral genomes, where gene gain appears to be the dominant process. This conclusion is compatible both with the vast size of most of the well-studied prokaryotic pangenomes, many of which are open (that is, show no signs of saturation with the addition of new genomes) [4, 39, 40], and evolu-tionary reconstructions for genomes of large DNA viruses [41, 42]. The parameters α and β can be interpreted in the con-text of the data analyzed. The largest values of α, which represents the rate of introduction of new genes into the system, correspond to the all-gene network for dsDNA viruses, followed by the pangenome network, the dsDNA core network and, finally, the RNA virus network. The differences in the α values likely reflects the permissive-ness of genomes and pangenomes to accept new genes, which correlates with their size, but also the trend for capture and exaptation of host genes that appears to dominate the evolution of large DNA viruses [43]. The differences in α could also be affected by the gene inclu-sion criteria applied to each network. Specifically, the emergence or capture of gene families that eventually be-come central (that is, part of the RNA and dsDNA virus core networks) is substantially less frequent than the de novo emergence or acquisition of less central, accessory genes (which are included in the all-gene dsDNA virus network) [44]. Conversely, in its turn, the largest value of β was obtained for to RNA viruses, followed by ds-DNA viruses (considering either all genes or only core genes) and, finally, the pangenomes. Indeed, the rate of organismal innovation is likely to be the highest for RNA viruses, with their small genomes, where acquisition of a single gene has the potential to found a new group of viruses [8], and the lowest for prokaryotic pangenomes, consisting of many thousands of genes The relative overlap in simulated networks is very close to unity, indicating absence of correlations, whereas over-lap in viral gene-sharing networks is significantly higher. There are various processes that could cause correla-tions but were not considered in our model, such as con-certed evolution of functionally linked genes, variations 9in the selection strength experienced by different gene categories, or heterogeneous HGT rates across different groups of genomes. Environmental pressure, whereby genes that are important for adaptation to a specific niche are convergently acquired by viruses that occupy that niche (for example, specialized lysins in mycophages [45]), could also contribute to nonrandom overlap in gene content. Arguably, however, the main cause of correla-tions in real gene-sharing networks is phylogenetic re-latedness among genomes. In our model, each genome results from an independent line of descent, with related-ness due only to HGT. This, obviously oversimplified, ap-proach could well approximate the relationships between distantly related organisms or viruses, considering the small size of evolutionarily stable gene cores, but breaks down for more closely related genomes. Reconciling the simple design of this model with tree-like evolution, while preserving the basic statistical properties of gene-sharing networks, remains an open task for future investigation.   

> VIII. MATERIALS AND METHODS A. Probability of link formation

We can extract information from the master (3) by introducing the generating function 

g(z, t ) ≡ X

> k≥1

gk(t)zk.

Differentiating g(z, t ) with respect to t and substituting (3) we obtain 

gt = (1 − z)zL(t)

 1 − βNG(t) zg z − g



> z

+ αz. (8) (Subscripts denote partial derivatives.) Notice that 

g(1 , t ) = Ng (t), so setting z = 1 in (8) yields the known equation ˙Ng = α. On the other hand, gz (1 , t ) = L(t). If we differentiate (8) with respect to z, set z = 1, use the identity gz (1 , t ) + gzz (1 , t ) = P 

> k≥1

k2gk(t), and compare with (1), we finally obtain (4).  

> B. Asymptotic degree distribution of genes

As t → ∞ , g(z, t ) ∼ Ng (t)p(z), with p(z) the gener-ating function of pk. Substituting in (8) and taking into account that in this limit ˙Ng = α, Ng (t)

L(t) → αL∞

, 1 − βNG(t) → 0,

where L∞ ≡ α+β +(1 −β)P∞, we find that p(z) satisfies the equation 

p′ + L∞

z(1 − z) p = L∞

1 − z , p(0) = 0 ,

whose solution is 

p(z) = L∞

 1 − zz

L∞ Z z

> 0

uL∞

(1 − u)L∞+1 du. 

With the change of variable u = z(1 − x)/(1 − zx ) this integral becomes 

p(z) = L∞z

Z 10

(1 − x)L∞

1 − zx dx. (9) Setting z = 1 in this expression immediately yields 

p(1) = 1, as expected. On the other hand, from the same expression p′(1) = L∞/(L∞ − 1). As gz (1 , t ) ∼

L∞t and, moreover, gz (1 , t ) ∼ αtp ′(1), it follows that 

L∞ = 1 + α (equivalently, P∞ = 1, consistent with the direct calculation from (4)). We can now expand the integrand in (9) 

p(z) = (1 + α)

> ∞

X

> k=1

zk

Z 10

xk−1(1 − x)1+ α dx 

= (1 + α)

> ∞

X

> k=1

zk Γ( k)Γ(2 + α)Γ( k + 2 + α) ,

from which we readily obtain (5).  

> C. Construction of empirical gene-sharing networks

RNA virus gene-sharing networks were constructed as described in [8]. Gene nodes correspond to a set of pro-tein domains identified using a representative ensemble of RNA virus genomes—including representative members of ICTV-approved virus families and unclassified virus groups—that was annotated and manually curated. The pangenome network was reconstructed from the pangenomes of 125 bacterial and archaeal species ana-lyzed in [36]. The Genome Taxonomy Database (GTDB) was parsed to identify species with at least 15 avail-able high-quality genomes, selecting at most one species per genus and discarding all medium and low-quality genomes. For computational reasons, species with more than 100 high-quality genomes were subsampled to keep a representative set of 100 genomes. Gene families were defined by mapping predicted open reading frames to the eggNOG database at the root level. Core genes (those present in all the genomes of a species) were not in-cluded in the pangenome network because these genes are known to experience strong selection against horizontal gene transfer, which produces trends incompatible with neutral gain and loss models [46]. The pangenome net-work was built by connecting each gene family to all the pangenomes in which it is present.  

> D. Numerical simulations and parameter fitting

To explore the regions of the {α, β } parameter space compatible with empirical data, we performed a com-prehensive parameter sweep over α (linearly spaced from 10 0.01 to 1 in 99 steps) and β (logarithmically spaced from 0.001 to 1 in 99 steps), with ϵ fixed at zero (no gene loss). For each parameter pair, we ran 1000 independent simulations. Each simulation proceeded until a time ts when it satis-fied both a minimum number of genes and genomes with heuristic thresholds tailored to each virus group: 1. dsDNA virus (full): Ng (ts) > 50 000 and NG(ts) >

1 500; 2. dsDNA virus (core): Ng (ts) > 3 200 and NG(ts) >

2 140; 3. RNA virus: Ng (ts) > 1 000 and NG(ts) > 5 000; 4. Pangenomes: suitable fits to distributions required increasing the number of genes and genomes to sizes that demanded prohibitively large computational time. We therefore fitted the long-time solution of the model, Eqs. (5) and (6). We also imposed maximum values due to computa-tional limits: dsDNA virus (full): 80000 genes, 4000 genomes; dsDNA virus (core): 30000 genes, 5000 genomes; RNA: 1500 genes, 18000 genomes in order to have a reasonable memory usage given the network prop-erties. Runs that attained the maximum value for one of the variables without having reached the minimum required for the other one were discarded. Attempt-ing a weaker rule (stopping when just one threshold was reached) failed to reproduce the heavy tails found in real data because there was not enough time for the simula-tions to generate the extreme-degree nodes (in genes or genomes) observed in empirical networks. Once simulations finished, simulated degree distribu-tions were compared to empirical ones via least-squares fitting. Gene degrees were binned logarithmically and genome degrees were binned linearly (50 bins for genes and 30 bins for genomes in dsDNA networks; 50 bins for genes and 10 bins for genome in RNA networks). Bins with no data were omitted. The optimal α and β were those that minimized the overall error (lower part of Ta-ble I). 

IX. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This work was funded by MI-CIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and by ERDF/EU (PGE) “A way of making Europe”, through grants PID2023-147963NB-C21, PID2022-141802NB-I00, PID2019-106618GA-I00, and CNS2023-145430. E.V.K. is supported through the intramural program of the U.S. National Institutes of Health. 

[1] W. F. Doolittle, Science 284 , 2124 (1999), https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.284.5423.2124. [2] V. Kunin, L. Goldovsky, N. Darzentas, and C. A. Ouzou-nis, Genome Res. 15 , 954 (2005). [3] E. V. Koonin and Y. I. Wolf, Nucleic Acids Res. 36 , 6688 (2008). [4] P. Puigb` o, A. E. Lobkovsky, D. M. Kristensen, Y. I. Wolf, and E. V. Koonin, BMC Biology 12 , 66 (2014). [5] A. Booth, C. Mariscal, and W. F. Doolittle, Ann. Rev. Microbiol. 70 , 279 (2016). [6] J. Iranzo, M. Krupovic, and E. V. Koonin, mBio 7,e00978 (2016). [7] J. Iranzo, E. V. Koonin, D. Prangishvili, and M. Krupovic, J. Virol. 90 , 11043 (2016). [8] Y. I. Wolf, D. Kazlauskas, J. Iranzo, A. Luc´ ıa-Sanz, J. H. Kuhn, M. Krupovic, V. V. Dolja, and E. V. Koonin, mBio 

9, e02329 (2018). [9] G. A. Pavlopoulos, P. I. Kontou, A. Pavlopoulou, C. Bouyioukos, E. Markou, and P. G. Bagos, GigaScience 

7, giy014 (2018). [10] J. Iranzo, M. Krupovic, and E. V. Koonin, Commun. Integr. Biol. 10 , e1296614 (2017). [11] E. Corel, R. M´ eheust, A. K. Watson, J. O. McIner-ney, P. Lopez, and E. Bapteste, Mol. Biol. Evol. 35 , 899 (2018). [12] G. Lima-Mendez, J. V. Helden, A. Toussaint, and R. Lep-lae, Mol. Biol. Evol. 25 , 762 (2008). [13] H. B. Jang, B. Bolduc, O. Zablocki, J. H. Kuhn, S. Roux, E. M. Adriaenssens, J. R. Brister, A. M. Kropinski, M. Krupovic, R. Lavigne, D. Turner, and M. B. Sulli-van, Nat. Biotechnol. 37 , 632 (2019). [14] M. E. J. Newman, SIAM Review 45 , 167 (2003), https://doi.org/10.1137/S003614450342480. [15] B. Charlesworth and D. Charlesworth, Genet. Res. Camb. 42 , 1 (1983). [16] C. H. Langley, J. F. Brookfield, and N. Kaplan, Genetics 

104 , 457 (1983). [17] M. E. Moody, J. Math. Biol. 26 , 347 (1988). [18] C. J. Basten and M. E. Moody, J. Math. Biol. 29 , 743 (1991). [19] M. A. Huynen and E. van Nimwegen, Molecular Biology and Evolution 15 , 583 (1998). [20] G. P. Karev, Y. I. Wolf, A. Y. Rzhetsky, F. S. Bere-zovskaya, and E. V. Koonin, BMC Evol. Biol. 2, 18 (2002). [21] G. P. Karev, Y. I. Wolf, F. S. Berezovskaya, and E. V. Koonin, BMC Evol. Biol. 4, 32 (2004). [22] I. Sela, Y. I. Wolf, and E. V. Koonin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113 , 11399 (2016). [23] J. Iranzo, P. Puigb` o, A. E. Lobkovsky, Y. I. Wolf, and E. V. Koonin, Genome Biol. Evol. 8, 2856 (2016). [24] J. Iranzo, J. A. Cuesta, S. Manrubia, M. I. Katsnel-son, and E. V. Koonin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 114 ,E5616 (2017). [25] E. V. Koonin, Y. I. Wolf, and G. P. Karev, Nature 420 ,218 (2002). [26] W. J. Reed and B. D. Hughes, Mathematical Biosciences 

189 , 97 (2004). [27] T. Hughes and D. A. Liberles, Gene 414 , 85 (2008). [28] A. L. Barab´ asi and R. Albert, Science 286 , 509 (1999). [29] M. E. J. Newman, Networks: An introduction (Oxford University Press, New York, 2010). 11 

[30] G. U. Yule, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B 213 , 21 (1925). [31] H. A. Simon, Biometrika 42 , 425 (1955). [32] S. C. Manrubia and D. H. Zanette, J. Theor. Biol. 216 ,461 (2002). [33] S. Jonhson, V. Dom´ ınguez-Garc´ ıa, and M. A. Mu˜ noz, PLoS ONE 8, 1 (2013). [34] A configuration model is a family of random graph mod-els designed to generate networks from a given degree sequence; that is, each node preserves its degree but the set of neighbors is randomly assigned. [35] B. Bollob´ as, European Journal of Combinatorics 1, 311 (1980). [36] S. Manzano-Morales, Y. Liu, S. Gonz´ alez-Bod´ ı, J. Huerta-Cepas, and J. Iranzo, Genome Biol. 24 , 250 (2023). [37] B. Snel, P. Bork, and M. A. Huynen, Genome Research 

12 , 17 (2002). [38] L. M. Bobay and H. Ochman, BMC Evol. Biol. 18 , 153 (2018). [39] G. Horesh, A. Taylor-Brown, S. McGimpsey, F. Lassalle, J. Corander, E. Heinz, and N. R. Thomson, Microbial Genomics 7 (2021). [40] A. E. Dewar, C. Hao, L. J. Belcher, M. Ghoul, and S. A. West, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 121 , e2320170121 (2024), https://www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.2320170121. [41] N. Yutin, Y. I. Wolf, and E. V. Koonin, Virology 466-467 , 38 (2014), special issue: Giant Viruses. [42] E. V. Koonin and N. Yutin, in Advances in Virus Re-search , Vol. 103, edited by M. Kielian, T. C. Metten-leiter, and M. J. Roossinck (Academic Press, 2019) pp. 167–202. [43] E. V. Koonin, V. V. Dolja, and M. Krupovic, Cell Host Microbe 30 , 917 (2022). [44] Y. I. Wolf, K. S. Makarova, A. E. Lobkovsky, and E. V. Koonin, Nature Microbiology 2, 16208 (2016). [45] M. J. Catal˜ ao and M. Pimentel, Viruses 10 ,10.3390/v10080428 (2018). [46] A. E. Lobkovsky, Y. I. Wolf, and E. V. Koonin, Genome Biology and Evolution 5, 233 (2013), https://academic.oup.com/gbe/article-pdf/5/1/233/17919466/evt002.pdf. 12 

Data Ng (×10 3) NG(×10 3) L(×10 3) ⟨kg ⟩ ⟨kG⟩ α(×10 −1) β(×10 −2) π

dsDNA all 3.4 1.1 98 .6 2.9 91 .8 4.3 [2 .1, 6.4] 0.96 [0 .7, 1.2] 2.5dsDNA core 1.6 1.1 30 .7 19 .5 28 .7 −0.6 [ −4.3, 2.7] 3.3 [0 .5, 5.6] 2.7RNA 0.4 2.9 15 .0 36 .2 5.3 −5.8 [ −7.8, −3.9] 28 .1 [18 .0, 38 .0] 2.2Pangenomes 42 0.1 136 .7 3.3 1093 3.3 [2 .0, 4.5] 0.08 [0 .04 , 0.12] 1.0

Model 

dsDNA all 61 (1 .5) 1.5 (0) 183 .4 (4 .7) 3 .0 (5) 122 (3) 4.8 [3 .5, 7.2] 0.81 [0 .57 , 0.93] 0 .80 (1) dsDNA core 7.4 (0 .3) 2.1 (0) 63 .0 (19 .0) 8 .6 (1) 29 (1) 1.2 [0 .7, 3.3] 3.05 [0 .76 , 3.76] 0 .91 (1) RNA 1.0 (0) 11 .6 (0 .5) 51 .4 (1 .2) 51 (1) 4.4 (1) 0.2 [0 .2, 0.2] 16 .3 [5 .7, 16 .3] 1.04 (1) TABLE I. Summary of variables and parameters obtained from data sets and the corresponding fits of the gene-sharing model. In the upper part of the table ( Data ) we show the size of empirical networks, the number of links L they have, the average number of genomes where each gene family is found (i.e. gene average degree, ⟨kg ⟩) and the average number of genes per genome (genome average degree, ⟨kG⟩). Parameters α and β have been obtained by directly fitting the asymptotic degree distributions, Eqs. (5) and (6). Values of overlap π have been obtained from Eq. (7) applied to real networks. In the lower part of the table ( Model ), we show the equivalent quantities averaged over realizations of the model with parameters that yield best fits to empirical degree distributions, following criteria to stop simulations as described in the main text. The value of π has been obtained as an average over such realizations. Number in parentheses indicate the standard deviations. Numbers in brackets indicate the 95% confidence intervals. See the main text for the application of the model to pangenomes.