Title: Cracking donuts and sorting lipids: geometry controls archaeal membrane stability and lipid organization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.15170v1

Published Time: Tue, 17 Mar 2026 06:27:06 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
## Cracking donuts and sorting lipids: geometry controls archaeal membrane stability and lipid organization 

Felix Frey 1,2,∗ Miguel Amaral 1, and Andela ˇSari´ c1

> 1

Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Klosterneuburg, Austria and 

> 2

Present address: Soft Matter & Biological Physics, Department of Applied Physics, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands 

(Dated: March 17, 2026) Cells are defined by lipid membranes that differ in their structure across the tree of life. While the membranes of most bacteria and eukaryotes consist of single-headed bilayer lipids, the membranes of archaea are composed of mixtures of single-headed bilayer lipids and double-headed bolalipids. Archaeal bolalipids can adopt straight or u-shaped conformations, enabling them – together with bilayer lipids – to control whether membranes form bilayer or monolayer structures. Yet, the phys-ical principles governing archaeal membranes remain largely unexplored, especially how membrane structure couples to externally imposed curvature during membrane remodeling. Here, we perform coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations of toroidal vesicles to systematically probe the effects of all relevant combinations of mean and Gaussian curvatures on shape stability and lipid organiza-tion. We find that soft bilayer membranes can sustain all curvatures induced, whereas rigid bolalipid monolayer membranes either transition to different vesicle shapes or rupture. Bilayer-mimicking u-shaped bolalipids and bilayer lipids are spatially accumulated in regions of high mean membrane curvature independent of Gaussian curvature. Our work identifies curvature-composition coupling as a physical signature of archaeal membrane remodeling. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Cells are defined by their boundary – the cell mem-brane [1]. This fluid membrane is composed of lipid molecules that, across the tree of life, self-assemble into distinct geometric structures [2]. In bacteria and eukaryotes, membranes are typically organized as bi-layers formed from single-headed bilayer lipids, which contain one hydrophilic head group attached to two hydrophobic tails [3]. By contrast, in archaea – the third domain of life – both bilayer and monolayer geo-metric structures are observed. This structural diver-sity arises because archaeal membranes are composed of mixtures of bilayer lipids and double-headed bo-lalipids, which possess two hydrophilic head groups connected by two hydrophobic tails [3]. Owing to their molecular geometry, bolalipids are believed to adopt two distinct conformations within membranes: a straight (trans-membrane) conformation in which both hydrophilic head groups occupy opposite mem-brane leaflets and a u-shaped (looped) conformation in which both head groups occupy the same mem-brane leaflet [4, 5]. This conformational versatility is thought to enable archaeal membranes to interpolate between bilayer and monolayer membrane structures, governed by the bilayer lipid content and the abun-dance of bilayer-mimicking u-shaped bolalipids. Archaeal membranes, like those of bacteria and eu-karyotes, continuously undergo remodeling processes and topological transformations such as fusion and fission events [6, 7]. The mechanisms available for these transformations depend on whether the mem-brane adopts a bilayer or monolayer structure, which governs the accessibility of processes such as curva- 

> ∗f.f.f.frey1@tue.nl

ture generation, leaflet area asymmetry and hemi-fusion [8, 9]. To theoretically investigate such pro-cesses, fine-grained models are required [10], as contin-uum theories often do not capture internal membrane structure [11, 12]. While curvature generation and membrane remodeling have been extensively studied in bilayer membranes [13–15], the physical principles governing archaeal membranes remain largely unex-plored. In particular, it is unclear how archaeal mem-branes with bilayer or monolayer geometric structure remodel and undergo topological transitions, or how membrane structure couples to externally imposed curvature. Here, we investigate how the structure of archaeal membranes, together with external curvature, gov-erns shape stability, lipid organization and topologi-cal remodeling. Analogous to living archaea, which can express bolalipids with different rigidities [16] and regulate the fraction of bilayer lipids in their membranes [17], our model allows independent con-trol over lipid stiffness and bilayer fraction. We conduct coarse-grained molecular dynamics simula-tions of toroidal vesicles, which represent energetically metastable membrane configurations. The geometry enables us to identify the conditions under which bi-layer and monolayer membranes undergo shape tran-sitions. Moreover, these toroidal vesicles, owing to their small size ( ∼ 70 nm diameter), are highly curved, and encompass all relevant combinations of mean and Gaussian curvatures, enabling a systematic investiga-tion of how curvature influences lipid organization. We conclude that both membrane structure and the membrane curvature jointly control shape stability and lipid organization during membrane remodeling. Specifically, our simulations show that toroidal vesi-cles of soft bilayer membranes, are stable regardless of whether they are composed of mixtures of straight and u-shaped bolalipids or of bilayer lipids. In these The following article has been submitted to The Journal of Chemical Physics . After it is published, it will be found at 

https://aip.scitation.org/journal/jcp .

> arXiv:2603.15170v1 [cond-mat.soft] 16 Mar 2026

2

Figure 1. Computational model, toroidal vesicle geometry and curvature distribution on toroidal vesicles. (A, left) Bacterial or eukaryotic bilayer membrane. (right) Archaeal monolayer membrane. (B, left) A bilayer lipid consisting of 1 head bead (gray) and 2 tail beads (cyan). The molecular stiffness is controlled via k0. (right) An archaeal bolalipid consisting of 2 head beads (gray) and 4 tail beads (pink). The molecular stiffness is controlled via k0 and kbola . Bilayer and bolalipid tail beads attract each other, with ω and ϵp controlling the range and strength of the hydrophobic interaction along lipid tail beads. (C) Bolalipids adopt two dominating conformations: u-shaped (orange) and straight shape (pink). (D) Torus geometry with ring radius Rring and cross section radius rcross . The toroidal angle ϑ parametrizes the cross-sectional tube of the torus. (E) At any point on the surface two principle curvatures C1 and C2 parametrize the shape that can be combined into the mean curvature H and Gaussian curvature K. (F) Normalized squared mean curvature on the Clifford torus, which has a toroidal aspect ratio of ρ = Rring /r cross = √2. (G) Normalized Gaussian curvature on the Clifford torus. (H) Toroidal vesicles for pure bolalipid membranes at kbola = 0 kBT (top), at kbola = 1 kBT (center) and a mixture membrane with bilayer content of fbi = 0 .7 and bolalipids at kbola = 2 kBT .

mixture membranes, both u-shaped bolalipids and bi-layer lipids accumulate in regions of high mean cur-vature, independent of Gaussian curvature. By con-trast, toroidal vesicles are unstable in rigid monolayer membranes composed of bolalipids that preferentially adopt a straight conformation, as well as in mixture membranes with low bilayer lipid content. In these cases, toroidal vesicles undergo shape transitions and form either spherical vesicles or flat membrane sheets. During such shape transitions, membrane pores can emerge, controlled by the bolalipid rigidity and the bilayer fraction. Notably, pores form heterogeneously on the inner and outer surfaces of the torus, where mean curvature is maximal, suggesting that pore for-mation serves to relieve curvature-induced stress. 

II. MODELING ARCHAEAL MEMBRANE VESICLES OF TOROIDAL GEOMETRY 

Archaeal membranes can be composed of single-headed bilayer lipids and double-headed bolalipids, and can adopt either a bilayer structure similar to bac-terial and eukaryotic membranes or a monolayer struc-ture (Fig. 1A). To model archaeal membranes, we ex-tend the bilayer lipid model by Cooke and Deserno [18] and build upon our previous work [19]. In the model, bilayer lipids are represented by 3 connected, volume-excluded beads. The molecular rigidity is controlled by a single harmonic angle potential between the head bead and the terminal tail bead, parametrized by k0

(Fig. 1B, left). Bolalipids are modeled analogously as 6 connected, volume-excluded beads, with two har-monic angle potentials between the two head beads and the corresponding tails beads, also parametrized by k0 (Fig. 1B, right). To account for the increased rigidity associated with cyclopentane rings found in archaeal bolalipids [16], we further introduce two ad-ditional harmonic angle potentials between pairs of tail beads. This interaction is parametrized by kbola 

and allows systematic tuning of bolalipid stiffness. Lipid tail beads interact via an effective attraction due to the hydrophobic effect of the implicit solvent. This attraction is characterized by the parameters ω,which sets the interaction range and ϵp, which deter-mines the interaction strength (Fig. 1B). Tail beads of both bilayer lipids (cyan) and bolalipids (pink) attract one another, whereas head beads (gray) interact solely through volume exclusion. A complete description of the model and interaction potentials is provided in the 3supplementary material. A bolalipid can mainly adopt two conformations within a membrane, which we quantify by the angle θ

between the two head beads (Fig. 1C). In the u-shaped (looped) conformation, both heads beads occupy the same membrane leaflet, whereas in the straight con-formation the head beads occupy opposing leaflets. To investigate the effect of membrane curvature, we assemble lipids into toroidal vesicles. The torus sur-face can be parametrized in Cartesian coordinates as: 

x = ( Rring + rcross sin ϑ) cos φy = ( Rring + rcross sin ϑ) sin φz = rcross cos ϑ . (1) Here, Rring and rcross are the ring (major) radius and cross-section (minor) radius, respectively and ϑ ∈

[−π, π ] and φ ∈ [0 , 2π] are the toroidal (polar-like) an-gle around the cross-sectional tube and the azimuthal angle around the torus’ major ring (Fig. 1D). The sur-face parametrization implies that one radius – here, the cross-section radius rcross – sets the length scale of the torus, while the dimensionless toroidal aspect ratio (the ratio of radii), ρ = Rring /r cross , determines its overall shape. To investigate the effect of mem-brane curvature and to limit system size, we select a relatively modest cross-section radius, rcross = 15 σ,which enforces a high membrane curvature; here, σ

is the size of a lipid bead and the simulation unit of length, approximately corresponding to ∼ 1 nm. For the torus shape, we adopt the Clifford torus with the toroidal aspect ratio ρ = √2, which minimizes the bending energy of the membrane according to the Hel-frich Hamiltonian [20]. With these parameters, the resulting toroidal vesicle has a diameter of roughly 2( Rring + rcross ) ≈ 72 nm. Comparing the bending and topological energies for the shape transition from a Clifford torus to a sphere, in the absence of a negative preferred membrane cur-vature, we obtain the fission energy [20]: 

E◦→•  

> fission

= 4 πκ 



2 − π + ¯κκ



. (2) Here, κ is the bending rigidity of the membrane and ¯ κ

is the Gaussian curvature modulus. Using the Cooke                           

> Table I. Model parameter values. Parameter Value Simulation unit of energy kBT
> Simulation unit of length σ
> Simulation unit of time t0
> Bolalipid rigidity kbola 0−5kBT
> Interaction strength ϵpkBT / (1 .3 + kbola /(10 kBT)) Lipid bead size σ
> Interaction range ω1.5σ
> Timestep ts0.01 t 0
> Simulation time τ4×10 4t0
> Simulation beads 54000

and Deserno model for bilayer membranes [18] and its extension to bolalipid membranes [19], the ratio of the Gaussian curvature modulus to the bending rigidity was found to be ¯ κ/κ ∼ − 1 for bilayers [21] and ¯ κ/κ ∼−0.5 for flexible bolalipid membranes at vanishing molecular rigidity ( kbola = 0 kBT ) [19]. The values fall within the range −0.3 ≤ κ/κ ≤ − 1, commonly reported for lipid membranes [12, 21]. Although in-termediate energy barriers may hinder the transition, Eq. (2) predicts an energy gain when the membrane transitions from a torus to a sphere. Eq. (2) also sug-gests that the toroidal vesicle can be destabilized by incorporating bolalipids of higher molecular rigidity 

kbola or by decreasing the bilayer fraction fbi in a mixture membrane, which both increase the bending rigidity κ [19]. We thus expect the Clifford torus to be energetically metastable, with the fission transition to a spherical vesicle occurring depending on both the membrane rigidity and the archaeal membrane struc-ture. The torus exhibits spatially varying curvatures along its surface, with the mean curvature H and Gaussian curvature K given by [22]: 

H = 12 (C1 + C2) = Rring + 2 rcross sin ϑ

2rcross (Rring + rcross sin ϑ) (3) 

K = C1C2 = sin ϑrcross (Rring + rcross sin ϑ) , (4) where C1 and C2 are the principal curvatures along the torus surface(Fig. 1E). We characterize the toroidal vesicle geometry using the squared mean cur-vature H2 and the Gaussian curvature K. While the squared mean curvature is always non-negative, the Gaussian curvature can be positive, negative or zero. Apart from the trivial case of a flat membrane with vanishing squared mean curvature and Gaussian cur-vature ( H2 = 0 and K = 0), all other combinations of curvatures manifest themselves on the Clifford torus. Specifically, we observe H2 > 0 and K > 0 at the outer surface (sphere-like), H2 > 0 and K = 0 at the top and bottom (cylinder-like), H2 > 0 and K < 0at the inner surface (saddle-like) and H2 = 0 and 

K < 0 at the interface between inner surface and top/bottom (catenoid-like). These regions are illus-trated in Fig. 1F and G. We simulate toroidal vesicles composed of pure bolalipids with varying molecular rigidity kbola (see Fig. 1H, top and center), as well as vesicles contain-ing mixtures with varying bilayer fraction fbi and rela-tively stiff bolalipids with kbola = 2 kBT (see Fig. 1H, bottom). Simulation parameters for both pure and mixed membranes are listed in Table I. The dynam-ics of lipids in our coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulation are obtained via Langevin dynamics (see supplementary material). 4

Figure 2. Bolalipid rigidity controls stability of toroidal vesicles composed of bolalipids. (A) Shape diagram of pure bolalipid membranes as a function of the bolalipid rigidity kbola . For kbola = 0 kBT , we observe toroidal vesicle shapes. With increasing values of kbola , we observe spherical vesicles ( kbola = 1 kBT ), flat membrane sheets or truncated wedges (ratio 2:2 for kbola = 2 kBT ) and flat membrane sheets ( kbola > 2 kBT ). Membrane pores can only be observed for 

kbola ≥ 2 kBT . (B) Reduced volume ν along the simulation trajectory for different values of the bolalipid rigidity kbola .(C) Number of handles or pores in the membrane along the simulation trajectory for different values of the bolalipid rigidity kbola . (D) Global u-shaped bolalipid fraction uf as a function of the bolalipid rigidity kbola . Dashed gray line shows uf (kbola ), fitted for a flat membrane. (B-D) Each data point shows an average over Nseeds = 4 random initial seeds. 

III. BOLALIPID RIGIDITY DETERMINES STABILITY OF TOROIDAL VESICLES OF PURE BOLALIPID MEMBRANES 

We first assess the stability of Clifford toroidal vesi-cles composed of pure bolalipid membranes. The vesicle shape at the end of the simulated trajecto-ries depends strongly on the bolalipid rigidity kbola 

(Fig. 2A, Video S1). For vanishing bolalipid rigid-ity ( kbola = 0 kBT ), the toroidal vesicles remain sta-ble. At moderate bolalipid rigidity ( kbola = 1 kBT ), we observe a transition to a spherical vesicle geom-etry. The transition occurs via membrane fission at the center of the torus, causing the stalk of the torus to vanish. Upon further increasing the bolalipid rigidity ( kbola ≥ 2 kBT ), the membrane becomes un-stable and ruptures: pores form on the outer sur-face of the toroidal vesicles and the membrane ulti-mately flattens. These observations can be rational-ized within continuum membrane theory. Increasing the bolalipid rigidity kbola leads to higher bending rigidity κ [19], which enhances the energy gain as-sociated with membrane fission (see Eq. (2)). At suf-ficiently high bolalipid rigidity kbola , however, mem-brane bending becomes energetically prohibitive, re-sulting in membrane rupture rather than a smooth topological transition. To quantify the smooth shape transitions of the vesicles along the simulated trajectories, we use the dimensionless reduced volume 

ν = 3V

4π   A

> 4π

3/2 , (5) which measures the ratio of the enclosed volume V to the surface area A. The reduced volume is one for a sphere ( ν = 1) and smaller than one for all other closed shapes ( ν < 1). We compute the reduced vol-ume ν by mapping the membrane surface onto a tri-angulated mesh and evaluating the enclosed volume 

V and the surface area A at every tenth timestep of the trajectory (see supplementary material). Owing to this procedure, the reduced volume ν can be de-termined only if the membrane is devoid of pores, re-stricting the analysis to vanishing and moderate bo-lalipid rigidities ( kbola ≤ 1 kBT ). The time evolution of the reduced volume ν, av-eraged over independent simulations seeds, is shown in Fig. 2B for different values of the bolalipid rigidity 

kbola . For vanishing bolalipid rigidity ( kbola = 0 kBT ,solid red line), the reduced volume ν remains approxi-mately constant throughout the trajectory. The small deviation from the theoretical value for a Clifford torus, νClifford ≈ 0.712 (dotted gray line), is expected because the membrane has a finite thickness (see sup-plementary material). For a moderate bolalipid rigid-ity ( kbola = 1 kBT , solid purple line), the reduced vol-5ume starts close to the theoretical value νClifford and gradually approaches 1 (dashed gray line), indicating a transition from a Clifford torus to a spherical vesicle within simulation time. To quantify how vesicle shape transitions proceed, we monitor the number of handles or pores in the membrane throughout the trajectory. To this end, we employ Euler’s polyhedron formula, which relates the genus g (the number of handles or pores) of N

closed surfaces to its mesh topology via the equation 2( N −g) = V −E +F , where V , E and F are the num-ber of vertices, edges and faces obtained by remesh-ing the vesicle surface. As long as the reduced vol-ume ν can be determined, we reconstruct two separate surface meshes corresponding to the outer and inner membrane leaflets. To evaluate the number of han-dles, we account for both leaflets. Once the membrane ruptures and the reduced volume ν can no longer be evaluated, the two meshes merge into a single surface 

N = 1. In this regime, the genus g directly represents the number of pores that perforate the membrane (see supplementary material). The time evolution of the number of handles or pores for different values of the bolalipid rigidity kbola ,averaged over independent simulations seeds, is shown in Fig. 2C. For vanishing bolalipid rigidity ( kbola =0 kBT , solid red line), one handle persists throughout the entire trajectory, corresponding to the handle of the Clifford torus (dotted gray line). For moderate bolalipid rigidity ( kbola = 1 kBT , solid purple line), the number of handles decreases from one to zero as the toroidal vesicle transitions to a spherical vesicle (dashed gray line). In contrast, for stiff bolalipids (kbola ≥ 2 kBT , yellow and gray solid lines), the num-ber of pores initially increases and then rapidly de-creases, indicating membrane rupture. By comparing the vesicle shapes shown in Fig. 2A, we observe that u-shaped bolalipids (orange) become less prevalent as the bolalipid rigidity kbola increases. In contrast, the fraction of straight bolalipids (pink) increases as we observe shape transitions. To quan-tify the effect, we measure the global fraction of u-shaped bolalipids uf in the steady state, as well as the membrane relaxation timescale, as a function of the bolalipid rigidity kbola (Fig. S1). The steady state results of the u-shaped bolalipid fraction uf , aver-aged over independent simulations seeds, are shown in Fig. 2D. We find that uf decreases monotonically with increasing bolalipid rigidity kbola , in agreement with previous measurements for flat membranes (gray line, see supplementary material) [19]. However, for toroidal and spherical vesicles ( kbola = 0 kBT and 

kbola = 1 kBT ), the u-shaped bolalipid fraction uf is slightly enhanced compared to the prediction for the flat membrane. Moreover, during the transition from a toroidal vesicle to a spherical vesicle at moderate bolalipid rigidity ( kbola = 1 kBT ), the fraction of u-shaped bolalipids decreases over time (Fig. S1B). This observation shows that membrane shape and, more generally, membrane curvature globally promote the stabilization of u-shaped bolalipid conformations.  

> IV. BILAYER LIPID FRACTION DETERMINES STABILITY OF TOROIDAL VESICLES OF ARCHAEAL MIXTURE MEMBRANES

Archaeal membranes are typically composed of both bilayer and bolalipids [17]. To investigate their shape stability, we next consider toroidal vesicles formed from mixed archaeal membranes consisting of rela-tively stiff bolalipids ( kbola = 2 kBT ) and a variable bilayer lipid fraction fbi . We first construct a state diagram based on the vesicles shapes observed at the end of the simulated trajectories (Fig. 3A, Video S2). At low bilayer lipid fraction ( fbi = 0 .1), we observe shape transitions of the toroidal vesicle accompanied by membrane pore formation. Depending on the pore location, the final state is either a spherical vesicle (pores form on the outer surface) or a cylinder vesicle (pores form at opposite ends). For intermediate bi-layer fractions fbi = 0 .2 − 0.4, no membrane pores are observed; instead, the vesicle shape evolves smoothly into a sphere. At bilayer fractions of fbi = 0 .5 and 

fbi = 0 .6, independent simulation runs yield either toroidal or spherical vesicles as final states. For large bilayer fractions ( fbi ≥ 0.7), only stable toroidal vesi-cles are observed. To quantify the vesicle shape, we evaluate the re-duced volume ν, averaged over multiple simulation trajectories, for a varying bilayer fraction fbi . The results are shown in Fig. 3B. For a small bilayer frac-tion ( fbi = 0 .3, solid purple line), the reduced volume 

ν increases from the theoretical value of the Clifford-torus νClifford (dotted gray line) to ν = 1, confirming a transition to a spherical vesicle (dashed gray line). The reduced volume can be computed along the entire trajectory (the line is continuous), indicating that the membrane remains pore-free throughout the simula-tion trajectory. For an intermediate bilayer fraction (fbi = 0 .5, yellow solid line), the reduced volume ν

fluctuates considerably, reflecting the occurrence of either toroidal or spherical vesicles across indepen-dent simulation runs. Finally, at high bilayer frac-tion ( fbi = 0 .7, gray solid line), the reduced volume 

ν remains constant and close to the theoretical value of the Clifford torus νClifford , demonstrating that the toroidal vesicle is stable and that a transition to a spherical shape no longer occurs. To assess membrane integrity, we monitor the time evolution of the number of handles or pores in the vesicle membranes, averaged over independent simu-lations seeds, throughout the simulation trajectories (Fig. 3C). For a low bilayer fraction ( fbi = 0 .1, red solid line), the genus g initially increases and subse-quently decreases to zero. This behavior confirms that the toroidal vesicle transforms into a spherical vesicle (gray dashed line), with the transformation proceed-ing via the transient opening of membrane pores. For intermediate bilayer fractions fbi = 0 .3 − 0.5 (pur-ple and yellow solid lines), the number of handles de-creases along the trajectory, indicating a smooth topo-logical transition from a toroidal to a spherical vesicle 6                    

> Figure 3. Bilayer lipid fraction controls stability of toroidal vesicles of archaeal mixture membranes composed of bilayer and bolalipids. (A) Shape diagram of mixture membranes as a function of bilayer fraction fbi . For fbi = 0 .1, we observe spherical or cylindrical membrane shapes (ratio 3:1). With increasing values of fbi , we first observe spherical membrane shapes, followed by vesicles of torus shape. For fbi = 0 .5 and fbi = 0 .6, we observe either spherical or toroidal vesicles (ratio 2:2) as final state in independent simulation runs. For fbi = 0 .1, the transition from the initial toroidal membrane shape is accompanied by the appearance of transient membrane pores, which we do not observe otherwise. (B) Reduced volume νalong the simulation trajectory for different bilayer fractions fbi .(C) Number of handles or pores in the membrane along the simulation trajectory for different bilayer fractions fbi . (D) Global u-shaped bolalipid fraction uf
> as a function of fbi for mixture membranes of bilayer and bolalipids. (B-D) Each data point shows an average over
> Nseeds = 4 random initial seeds.

without pore formation. In contrast, at a high bilayer fraction ( fbi = 0 .7, gray solid line), the number of handles remains approximately one, confirming that the toroidal vesicle is stable and persists throughout the simulation (gray dotted line). To analyze membrane organization, we examine the fraction of u-shaped bolalipids and the distribution of bilayer lipids in Fig 3A. To quantify the abundance of u-shaped bolalipids, we analyze trajectories in steady state and determine the global fraction of u-shaped bolalipids uf as well as the relaxation timescale, as functions of the fraction of bilayer lipids fbi (Fig. S2). The steady state values of the u-shaped bolalipid frac-tion uf , averaged over multiple simulations seeds, as a function of the bilayer fraction fbi are shown in Fig. 3D. Overall, the fraction of u-shaped bolalipids 

uf remains rather small ( ≤ 2%). Notably, however, the fraction of u-shaped bolalipids uf exhibits a non-monotonic dependence on the bilayer fraction fbi .For low bilayer fractions ( fbi = 0 .1 − 0.4), the u-shaped bolalipid fraction uf decreases as bilayer lipids increasingly replace the structural role of u-shaped bolalipids. In contrast, at higher bilayer fractions (fbi = 0 .5 − 0.9), the toroidal vesicle becomes progres-sively more stable and the torus geometry promotes the formation of u-shaped bolalipids.  

> V. CURVATURE CONTROLS LIPID SORTING IN ARCHAEAL MEMBRANES

To investigate the spatial distribution of lipids in pure bolalipid membranes, we consider stable toroidal vesicles at vanishing bolalipid rigidity ( kbola = 0 kBT ). We first verify that the toroidal vesicles remain stable along the simulation trajectories. For this purpose, we monitor the reduced volume ν (Fig. 2B), the global amount of u-shaped bolalipids uf (Fig. S1A), the ring radius Rring (Fig. S3A), the cross section radius rcross 

(Fig. S3B), the toroidal aspect ratio ρ (Fig. S3C) and the toroidal hole radius Rring −rcross (Fig. S3D). Since all these quantities exhibit only minor variations over time, we consider the torus shape to be stable. This allows us to average over the trajectories and quantify the spatial fraction of u-shaped bolalipids as a func-tion of position on the vesicle surface. Given that the toroidal vesicle shape is stable, we determine the spatial distribution of u-shaped bo-lalipids along the membrane surface (see supplemen-tary material). To this end, we average over Nseeds =16 independent trajectories of Clifford tori in steady state (Fig. 4A left), project the bolalipid coordinates onto a cross-sectional circle (Fig. 4A right) and rep-resent each position by the toroidal (polar-like) angle 7

Figure 4. Curvature controls lipid distribution in pure bolalipid and archaeal mixture membranes. (A) For kbola = 0 kBT ,we observe membrane vesicles of torus shape (left). For the torus shape, the u-shaped bolalipid fraction uf is mapped on the cross-section circle (right), averaged and represented by the toroidal angle ϑ (bottom). (B) u-shaped bolalipid fraction uf as a function of ϑ (solid black line) with standard error (gray area). Along with uf , the scaled squared mean curvature ˜H2 (solid red line) and the scaled Gaussian curvature ˜K (solid purple line) are plotted. The global value along the torus is shown by the solid orange line. (C) The u-shaped bolalipid fraction uf as a function of the reduced squared mean curvature H2 · r2cross (red) and a linear fit to the data (solid black line). (B and C) Each data point shows an average over Nseeds = 16 random initial seeds. (D) For a bilayer fraction of fbi = 0 .7, we observe membrane vesicles of torus shape. The averaged bilayer fraction fbi as a function of the toroidal angle ϑ (solid black line) with standard error (gray area). Along with fbi , the scaled squared mean curvature ˜H2 (solid red line) and the scaled Gaussian curvature ˜K

(solid purple line) are plotted. (E) The bilayer fraction fbi as a function of the reduced squared mean curvature H2 · r2cross 

(red) and a linear fit to the data (solid black line). (F) Bilayer heterogeneity (for definition see text) as a function of the bilayer lipid fraction fbi . A completely homogeneous membrane would show a bilayer heterogeneity of 0 (solid orange line). (D-E) Each data point shows an average over Nseeds = 4 random initial seeds. 

ϑ (Fig. 4A bottom). Fig. 4B shows that the spatial u-shaped bolalipid fraction uf is heterogeneously dis-tributed along the toroidal angle ϑ (black line with standard error shown as the shaded gray area) and deviates considerably from the global average of the u-shaped bolalipid fraction uf (orange line). To test whether the mean or Gaussian curvature are correlated with the local u-shaped bolalipid fraction 

uf , we fit the scaled squared mean curvature ˜H2 (red line) and scaled Gaussian curvature ˜K (purple line) of the Clifford torus, defined as ˜H2(ϑ, ρ ) = min( uf ) + (max( uf ) − min( uf )) H2

max( H2)(6) ˜K(ϑ, ρ ) = min( uf ) + (max( uf ) − min( uf )) ×× K − min( K)max( K) − min( K) , (7) where H and K are the mean and Gaussian curva-ture on a torus (see Eq. (4)) and max( ·) and min( ·)denote the domain maximum and minimum values. This scaling ensures that ˜H2 and ˜K are bounded be-tween min( uf ) and max( uf ). Since the shape of the torus can vary slightly over time (Fig. S3), we treat the toroidal aspect ratio ρ as a free fit parameter in Eqs. (6) and (7). Fig. 4B shows that the u-shaped bo-lalipid fraction uf scales closely with the squared mean curvature ˜H2, whereas no correlation is observed with the Gaussian curvature ˜K. This indicates that the local squared mean curvature ˜H2 is the primary geo-metric factor controlling the u-shaped bolalipid frac-tion uf . From the fit, we obtain a toroidal aspect ratio of ρ = 1.48, which agrees with the value of 

ρ = 1 .39 obtained from a direct fit of the torus ge-ometry (Fig. S3C). We conclude that membrane ge-ometry, specifically the local squared mean curvature, governs lipid sorting in these vesicles. To rationalize the observed lipid sorting in terms of squared mean curvature, we turn to continuum mod-eling, following previous theoretical studies on lipid sorting in bilayer membranes [23–25]. We consider the energetic cost of bending a membrane patch of area A and constant mean curvature HE = 2 κH 2A , (8) 8where κ is the bending rigidity of the membrane. We assume that κ depends on the local u-shaped bolalipid fraction uf in curved membrane patches. Expanding the bending rigidity to linear order around its value in a flat reference state, we write κ ≈ κ0 + κc(u0f − uf ), where u0f is the bolalipid fraction in the flat mem-brane, κ0 and κc are the bending rigidities in the flat and curved states, respectively. Thus, mem-brane patches exhibit a reduced bending rigidity κ

with increased u-shaped bolalipid fraction uf , whereas patches become stiffer when the u-shaped bolalipid fraction uf is decreased. Furthermore, we assume that straight and u-shaped bolalipids behave as an ideal lattice gas within the membrane plane. In this case, the mixing entropy, in the absence of molecular interactions, is given by 

S = −kB (( N − Nu) ln(1 − uf ) + Nu ln uf ) , (9) with N and Nu being the number of bolalipids in total and the number of u-shaped bolalipids, respectively. We assume that the mixing entropy is maximized in the homogeneous flat state at u0f and we expand S

around this state: 

−T S ≈ − T S 0 + 12 ks(u0f − uf )2 , (10) where S0 is the entropy of the homogeneous state and 

ks is an expansion coefficient. Minimizing the free energy F = E − T S with respect to the u-shaped bolalipid fraction uf then yields 

uf = u0f + ζH 2 , (11) with ζ = 2 Aκ c/k s. This result predicts that the local u-shaped bolalipid fraction uf increases linearly with the squared mean curvature H2, consistent with pre-vious observations [19]. The prediction can be con-firmed by correlating the u-shaped bolalipids frac-tion uf with the reduced squared mean curvature 

H2 · r2cross , using the corresponding toroidal aspect ra-tio ρ (Fig. 4C). We conclude that membrane shape, and in particular the squared mean curvature, both lo-cally and globally enforces the enrichment of u-shaped bolalipids. We next examine our simulations of archaeal mix-ture membranes, in which u-shaped bolalipids are rare and bilayer lipids confer membranes flexible. We ask whether bilayer lipids show local enrichment along the membrane surface, analogous to the curvature-driven                                   

> Table II. Toroidal aspect ratio ρ=Rring /r cross derived from the analysis of the torus geometry (Figs. S3 and S4-6) and the analysis of uf(Fig. 4B) and fbi (Fig. 4D and Fig. S7). Simulation ρ(geometry) ρ(lipid composition) Bolalipid torus ρ= 1 .39 ρ= 1 .48 Bilayer torus fbi = 0 .7ρ= 1 .36 ρ= 1 .30 Bilayer torus fbi = 0 .8ρ= 1 .38 ρ= 1 .20 Bilayer torus fbi = 0 .9ρ= 1 .36 ρ= 1 .31

enrichment of u-shaped bolalipids. To address this, we focus on mixture membranes with bilayer lipid frac-tions fbi = 0 .7 − 0.9 and relatively stiff bolalipids (kbola = 2 kBT ), where the toroidal shape persists throughout the simulation trajectories (Fig. 3A-C). The stability of the toroidal geometry is further con-firmed by analyzing the ring radius Rring , the cross-section radius rcross , the toroidal aspect ratio ρ and the hole radius Rring − rcross for fbi = 0 .7 (Fig. S4), 

fbi = 0 .8 (Fig. S5) and fbi = 0 .9 (Fig. S6), which vary only weakly over time. We conclude that the toroidal shape is stable, allowing us to quantify the local frac-tion of the bilayer lipids along the torus surface. Following the same protocol used for u-shaped bo-lalipids, we determine the local bilayer fraction fbi ,averaged over Nseeds = 4 independent trajectories, along the membrane surface. In Fig. 4D, the local bilayer fraction for fbi = 0 .7 is plotted as a function of the toroidal angle ϑ (black line) with standard error (gray shaded area). We fit the scaled squared mean curvature ˜H2 (red line) and scaled Gaussian curva-ture ˜K (purple line) of the Clifford torus to the data. Fig. 4D shows that the bilayer fraction fbi is not uni-form along the torus surface but instead correlates with the squared mean curvature. This trend is con-sistent for Clifford tori with higher bilayer fractions, 

fbi = 0 .8 and fbi = 0 .9 (Fig. S7). From the fits, we ex-tract values of the toroidal aspect ratio ρ and compare them to the geometrical analysis of the torus shape in Figs. S4-6. The small deviations likely arise from shape variations and irregularities of the membrane tori (Table II). Overall, the agreement confirms that the membrane geometry governs the local distribution of both bilayer and bolalipids in mixture membranes. Based on Eq. (11), we also expect that the local bi-layer fraction fbi increases linearly with the squared mean curvature H2 in mixture membranes. This ex-pectation is confirmed when plotting the bilayer frac-tion fbi as a function of the reduced squared mean curvature H2 · r2cross , using the corresponding toroidal aspect ratio ρ for fbi = 0 .7 (Fig. 4E and Fig. S8A). Similar linear correlations are observed for Clifford tori with higher bilayer fractions, fbi = 0 .8 (Fig. S8B) and fbi = 0 .9 (Fig. S8C). To quantify the effect of the overall bilayer lipid fraction on local lipid organization, we define the bi-layer heterogeneity as ( f max bi −f min bi )/f max bi , where f max bi 

and f min bi are the maximum and minimum local bilayer fractions along the toroidal angle ϑ. Fig. 4F shows that bilayer heterogeneity decreases with increasing global bilayer fraction fbi , reflecting that the relative enrichment of bilayer lipids along high-curvature re-gions becomes less pronounced as more bilayer lipids are available.  

> VI. DISCUSSION

In this work, we investigated the interplay between lipid geometry, membrane curvature, shape stability 9and lipid organization in archaeal membranes. To probe curvature effects on membranes, a variety of approaches have previously been employed in simula-tions and experiments, including scaffolding particles [26], adhering cargo beads [19, 23] and pulling mem-brane tethers [27, 28]. Here, we assembled membranes composed of bilayer and bolalipids into the shape of a Clifford toroidal vesicle, which allowed us to system-atically disentangle the effects of mean and Gaussian curvature within a single membrane geometry. Our coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations access regimes of large curvature, as the simulated toroidal vesicles have diameters of about 70 nm. This comple-ments earlier experimental studies of toroidal vesicles formed from polymerized membranes at the microme-ter scale [29]. Moreover, the Clifford torus represents a metastable geometry of the membrane shape energy and can undergo shape transitions. Therefore, our ap-proach allowed us to investigate how membrane struc-ture and composition jointly control membrane shape stability and lipid organization. For pure bolalipid membranes, we found that the bolalipid rigidity kbola governs membrane shape sta-bility. For membranes at vanishing bolalipid rigid-ity ( kbola = 0), containing approximately 50% u-shaped bolalipids and exhibiting a bending rigidity of κ ≈ 8 kBT [19], the toroidal vesicle remained sta-ble. As the bolalipid rigidity kbola increased, most bolalipids adopted a straight conformation, the mem-brane approached a monolayer geometry and the bending rigidity κ increased. In this regime, the toroidal vesicle either transformed into a spherical vesicle or ruptured and ultimately became flat. For mixture membranes composed of bilayer lipids and rigid bolalipids, we found that the bilayer fraction con-trols membrane shape and stability. At small bilayer fractions, corresponding to a large membrane rigidity, the toroidal vesicles were unstable and transitioned into spherical vesicles. In contrast, larger bilayer frac-tions and thus smaller bending rigidities, stabilized the toroidal vesicle, preventing further transitions. A comparison between pure bolalipid membranes and mixed membranes revealed a qualitative differ-ence in the torus-to-sphere transition pathway. In mixed membranes at low bilayer fraction fbi = 0 .1, the transition was accompanied by transient pores, con-sistent with the large bending rigidity of κ ≈ 50 kBT .By contrast, in pure bolalipid membranes at a mod-erate bolalipid rigidity kbola = 1 kBT , the membrane deformed smoothly without pore formation, reflecting a lower rigidity of κ ≈ 30 kBT [19]. While curvature-induced lipid sorting has been ex-tensively investigated for bilayer membranes in both experiments and simulations [23, 26, 27, 30–33], it has not been previously studied for bolalipid mem-branes or bolalipid-bilayer mixtures. To elucidate how membrane curvature affects lipid organization in these systems, we analyzed the spatial distribution of lipids in toroidal vesicles formed from archaeal mem-branes. We found that both u-shaped bolalipids and bilayer lipids preferentially accumulate in regions of high squared mean curvature, independent of Gaus-sian curvature. This curvature-driven sorting emerges from a balance between minimizing the membrane bending energy and maximizing the mixing entropy of the lipids. Despite being modest in magnitude ( ∼

1.5% for u-shaped bolalipids, ∼ 5% for bilayer lipids), the enrichment identifies curvature-composition cou-pling as a physical signature of archaeal membrane remodeling. Our work suggests an interesting experimental setup. Since rigid bolalipids are depleted from re-gions of high membrane curvature, whereas u-shaped bolalipids preferentially accumulate in such regions, both species could serve as intrinsic membrane curva-ture sensors. By fluorescently labeling bolalipids, lo-cal membrane curvature could be inferred from spatial variations in fluorescence intensity, enabling direct vi-sualization and quantitative analysis of curvature dis-tributions. Our results also hint at an important distinction between bolalipid and bilayer membranes. While bo-lalipids must undergo conformational change to tran-sition from the straight to the u-shaped conformation in order to accommodate regions of high membrane curvatures, bilayer lipids can simplify diffuse within the membrane plane to such regions. In our model, the flip-flop rates of bilayer lipids and thus also the rates of conformational change of bolalipids are likely higher than in biological membranes [18, 23]. As a consequence, our simulations reach steady state mem-brane configurations relatively rapidly through a com-bination of diffusion and lipid conformational changes, leading to similar membrane remodeling dynamics in membranes composed of u-shaped bolalipids and bi-layer lipids. In biological membranes, however, the relevant timescales differ substantially. While proteins that promote lipid flip-flop events, such as flippases and scramblases have been identified also in archaea [34, 35], it remains an open question whether analo-gous proteins exist that catalyze conformational tran-sitions of bolalipids from straight to u-shaped states [5]. This disparity implies that, although bolalipid membranes may be as flexible as bilayer membranes, the dynamics of shape transformations in bolalipid membranes could be much slower than in bilayer mem-branes in the absence of proteins that facilitate the transition from straight to u-shaped conformations. Our study provides insight into fundamental bio-logical processes in the archaeal branch of the tree of life, such as cell division and vesicle formation, which all induce dramatic curvature changes. Moreover, our work reveals curvature-composition coupling as a hall-mark of archaeal membrane remodeling.  

> VII. DATA AVAILABILITY

The simulation input files are freely available at https://zenodo.org/records/18772087. 10 

VIII. SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL 

Details on the computational model and the simu-lation analysis, including Figs. S1-S8 and Videos S1 and S2, are available in the supplementary material. 

IX. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

FF acknowledges financial support by the NOMIS foundation. MA and A ˇS acknowledge funding by the Volkswagen Foundation Grant Az 96727. A ˇS ac-knowledges funding by ERC Starting Grant “NEPA” 802960 and Vallee scholarship. 

[1] B. Alberts, A. Johnson, J. Lewis, D. Morgan, M. Raff, K. Roberts, and P. Walter, Molecular biology of the cell: Sixth edition (Garland science, New York, 2015). [2] S. B. Gould, Curr. Biol. 28 , R381 (2018). [3] S.-V. Albers and B. H. Meyer, Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 

9, 414 (2011). [4] D. P. Brownholland, G. S. Longo, A. V. Struts, M. J. Justice, I. Szleifer, H. I. Petrache, M. F. Brown, and D. H. Thompson, Biophysical Journal 97 , 2700 (2009). [5] A. Bhattacharya, I. D. Falk, F. R. Moss, T. M. Weiss, K. N. Tran, N. Z. Burns, and S. G. Boxer, Chem. Sci. 

15 , 14273 (2024). [6] G. Tarrason Risa, F. Hurtig, S. Bray, A. E. Hafner, L. Harker-Kirschneck, P. Faull, C. Davis, D. Pap-atziamou, D. R. Mutavchiev, C. Fan, L. Meneguello, A. Arashiro Pulschen, G. Dey, S. Culley, M. Kilkenny, D. P. Souza, L. Pellegrini, R. A. M. de Bruin, R. Henriques, A. P. Snijders, A. ˇSari´ c, A.-C. Lind˚ as, N. P. Robinson, and B. Baum, Science 369 , eaaz2532 (2020). [7] J. Liu, N. Soler, A. Gorlas, V. Cvirkaite-Krupovic, M. Krupovic, and P. Forterre, microLife 2, uqab007 (2021). [8] J. Warner and B. O’Shaughnessy, Biophys. J. 103 ,689 (2012). [9] R. K. W. Spencer, I. Santos-P´ erez, I. Rodr´ ıguez-Renovales, J. M. Martinez Galvez, A. V. Shnyrova, and M. M¨ uller, Nat. Commun. 15 , 2793 (2024). [10] M. Mu˜ noz-Basagoiti, F. Frey, B. Meadowcroft, M. Amaral, A. Prada, and A. ˇSari´ c, Soft Matter 21 ,7736 (2025). [11] U. Seifert, Adv. Phys. 46 , 13 (1997). [12] M. Deserno, Chem. Phys. Lipids. 185 , 11 (2015). [13] H. T. McMahon and J. L. Gallop, Nature 438 , 590 (2005). [14] J. Zimmerberg and M. M. Kozlov, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 7, 9 (2006). [15] F. Frey and T. Idema, Soft Matter 17 , 3533 (2021). [16] P. L.-G. Chong, Chem. Phys. Lipids 163 , 253 (2010). [17] M. Tourte, P. Schaeffer, V. Grossi, and P. M. Oger, Front. Microbiol. 11 , 526 (2020). [18] I. R. Cooke and M. Deserno, J. Chem. Phys. 123 ,224710 (2005). [19] M. Amaral, F. Frey, X. Jiang, B. Baum, and A. ˇSari´ c, eLife 14 , RP105432 (2025). [20] Ou-Yang Zhong-can, Phys. Rev. A 41 , 4517 (1990). [21] M. Hu, J. J. Briguglio, and M. Deserno, Biophys. J. 

102 , 1403 (2012). [22] J. Wohlert, W. K. den Otter, O. Edholm, and W. J. Briels, J. Chem. Phys. 124 , 154905 (2006). [23] I. R. Cooke and M. Deserno, Biophysical Journal 91 ,487 (2006). [24] J. Derganc, Phys. Biol. 4, 317 (2007). [25] A. Callan-Jones, B. Sorre, and P. Bassereau, Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 3, a004648 (2011). [26] M. K¨ onig, R. De Vries, F. Gr¨ unewald, S. Marrink, and W. Pezeshkian, bioRxiv 10.1101/2023.12.15.571845 (2023). [27] B. Sorre, A. Callan-Jones, J.-B. Manneville, P. Nas-soy, J.-F. Joanny, J. Prost, B. Goud, and P. Bassereau, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106 , 5622 (2009). [28] S. Baoukina, H. I. Ing´ olfsson, S. J. Marrink, and D. P. Tieleman, Advcd Theory and Sims 1, 1800034 (2018). [29] M. Mutz and D. Bensimon, Phys. Rev. A 43 , 4525 (1991). [30] A. Tian and T. Baumgart, Biophys. J. 96 , 2676 (2009). [31] M. M. Kamal, D. Mills, M. Grzybek, and J. Howard, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106 , 22245 (2009). [32] E. Beltr´ an-Heredia, F.-C. Tsai, S. Salinas-Almaguer, F. J. Cao, P. Bassereau, and F. Monroy, Commun Biol 

2, 225 (2019). [33] M. P¨ ohnl, M. F. W. Trollmann, and R. A. B¨ ockmann, Nat. Commun. 14 , 8038 (2023). [34] K. S. Makarova, M. Y. Galperin, and E. V. Koonin, Biochimie 118 , 302 (2015). [35] A. Verch` ere, W.-L. Ou, B. Ploier, T. Morizumi, M. A. Goren, P. B¨ utikofer, O. P. Ernst, G. Khelashvili, and A. K. Menon, Sci. Rep. 7, 9522 (2017). [36] A. P. Thompson, H. M. Aktulga, R. Berger, D. S. Bolintineanu, W. M. Brown, P. S. Crozier, P. J. in ’t Veld, A. Kohlmeyer, S. G. Moore, T. D. Nguyen, R. Shan, M. J. Stevens, J. Tranchida, C. Trott, and S. J. Plimpton, Comput. Phys. Commun. 271 , 108171 (2022). [37] A. Stukowski, Model Simul. Mat. Sci. Eng. 18 , 015012 (2009). 1

## Supplementary material Cracking donuts and sorting lipids: geometry controls archaeal membrane stability and lipid organization 

Felix Frey, Miguel Amaral, Andela ˇSari´ c  

> I. COMPUTATIONAL MODEL A. Coarse-grained particle based model of bilayer and bolalipids

To model bilayer and bolalipids we follow the model of Cooke and Deserno for bilayer lipids [18] and our extension to bolalipids [19]. In the model, a bilayer lipid consists of one head bead and two tail beads (Fig. 1B). A bolalipid is represented by joining two bilayer lipids along their tails, so it consists of two head beads that are connected by four tail beads (Fig. 1B). As a result, bilayer and bolalipids contain identical head and tail groups. Adjacent beads of bilayer and bolalipids are connected by finite extensible nonlinear elastic (FENE) bonds. Including a repulsive Lennard-Jones potential that enforces volume exclusion, we obtain the following potential: 

Ubond =



− 12 KR 20 ln 



1 −

 rR0

2

+ ϵ

h  rm

> r

12 − 2   rm

> r

6 + 1 

i

, 0 ≤ r < r c,

− 12 KR 20 ln 



1 −

 rR0

2

, rc ≤ r ≤ R0.

(S1) The first term of the potential is attractive, while the second term is repulsive. In the first term, describing the bond, K = 30 kBT σ −2 is the energy density of the bond and R0 = 1 .5 σ

defines the maximum extent of the bond. In the second term, describing volume exclusion, 

ϵ = 1 kBT defines the energy scale of the repulsive interaction with the potential minimum at 

rm = 2 16 σ ≈ 1.122 σ and the cut-off at the minimum of the potential rc = rm. We note that in the simulations our time, length and energy units are t0, σ and kBT with the Boltzmann constant kB = 1. As a result, the unit of mass is given by 1 m = 1 kBT t 20σ−2.Between the first, second and third bead of a bilayer lipid we define the angle α for which we introduce a harmonic angle potential of the following form 

Uangle = Kα (α − α0)2 , (S2) with Kα = k0 = 5 kBT and α0 = π. For a bolalipid, we introduce identical harmonic angle potentials between the first three beads and the last three beads with Kα = k0. In addition, we introduce two angle potentials between the second, third and fourth bead and between the third, fourth and fifth bead for bolalipids with Kα = kbola , varying between 0 kBT and 5 kBT .Head beads of different lipids interact with each other and with non-bonded tail beads solely through volume exclusion. The repulsive potential is given by 

Uhead bead =

(ϵ

h  rm

> r

12 − 2   rm

> r

6 + 1 

i

, 0 ≤ r < r c,

0 , rc ≤ r. (S3) In Eq. (S3), both the minimum of the potential and the cut-off are set to rm = rc = 0 .95 · 2 16 σ,similar to [18]. For bilayer lipids, the energy scale is given by ϵ = 1 /1.3 kBT . In contrast, to represent bolalipids at different molecular rigidities kbola and to keep the assembled membranes in a fluid state, we follow our previous approach and vary the energy scale in Eq. (S3) given by 

ϵ = ϵp = 1 /(1 .3 + kbola /(10 kBT )) kBT [19]. 2

Table I. The used number of bolalipids (# bolalipids), bilayer lipids (# bilayer lipids), the total number of lipids (# lipids) and the lipid bead number (# beads) for different values of the bilayer fraction fbi .

fbi 0.0 (pure bolalipid membrane) 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 # bolalipids 9000 8526 8000 7411 6750 6000 5142 4153 3000 1638 # bilayer lipids 0 946 2000 3176 4500 6000 7714 9692 12000 14726 # lipids 9000 9472 10000 10589 11250 12000 12856 13845 15000 16364 # beads 54000 53994 54000 53994 54000 54000 53994 53994 54000 53994 

Non-bonded tail beads interact with each other according to the following potential: 

Utail bead =



−ϵ + ϵ

h  rm

> r

12 − 2   rm

> r

6 + 1 

i

, 0 ≤ r < r m,

−ϵ cos 2

 π(r−rm)2ω



, rm ≤ r < r c,

0 , rc ≤ r. 

(S4) In Eq. (S4), the bilayer tail-tail interaction energy is given by ϵ = 1 /1.3 kBT , the potential minimum is at rm = 2 16 σ and the cut-off at rc = rm +ω, where ω = 1 .5 σ is the range of the inter-action potential. For bolalipid tail bead interactions, we use ϵp = 1 /(1 .3 + kbola /(10 kBT )) kBT .When we simulate mixture membranes of bilayer lipids and bolalipids we use kbola = 2 kBT and 

ϵ = 1 /1.3 kBT so that bilayer lipids and bolalipids interact in the same way. 

B. Initial distribution of lipids on the surface of a torus 

In our simulations, we initially distribute lipids along a Clifford torus. We therefore randomly sample lipid positions from a torus geometry with ring radius Rring = √2 · 15 σ, cross section radius rcross = 15 σ and toroidal aspect ratio ρ = Rring /r cross = √2. Depending on whether we simulate a bolalipid or mixture membrane, we either place one bolalipid or two bilayer lipids lined up in radial direction at each sampled position. In Table I we summarize the number of bolalipids (# bolalipids), bilayer lipids (# bilayer lipids), the total number of lipids (# lipids) and the lipid bead number (# beads) used for different values of the bilayer fraction fbi .

C. Relaxation phase of toroidal membrane vesicles and simulation geometry 

After the lipids have been distributed along the torus geometry, the lipid positions are relaxed to avoid overlapping lipids. To accommodate lipid position relaxation, we implement a soft potential that acts between all pairs of beads of different lipids and is parametrized as 

Usoft = A



1 + cos 

 πr rc

 

, (S5) where A is the energy scale of the potential and rc is the cut-off. In the simulations, we initially relax the lipid bead positions for 3 · 10 3ts timesteps with a timestep of ts = 0 .1 t 0. We increase A

from 3 kBT to 7 kBT in steps of 2 kBT and rc from 0 .7 σ to 1 σ in steps of 0 .2 σ and 0 .1 σ every 10 3 timesteps. We use a simulation box with periodic boundary conditions of dimensions Lx = 100 σ, Ly =100 σ and Lz = 100 σ. To simulate the system, we use the LAMMPS MD simulation package 3[36]. During the relaxation phase, we time integrate the positions and velocities of all lipid beads, carrying a mass of 1 m = 1 kBT t 20/σ 2 each. We limit the maximum distance a lipid bead can move in one timestep to 0 .1 σ between the first 2 · 10 3 timesteps and then to 0 .01 σ during the following 10 3 timesteps, implemented in LAMMPS via fix nve/limit. To visualize the system we use OVITO [37].  

> D. Integrating equations of motion

After the lipid positions have been sufficiently relaxed we start the simulation with the model as detailed in Eqs. (S1-S4). We simulate the system using overdamped Langevin dynamics in a fixed volume, implemented in LAMMPS via fix nve + fix langevin. We set the damping coefficient of the thermostat γ = 1 t0 and use a timestep of ts = 0 .01 t0. We run the simulations for 4 · 10 6

timesteps and save the bead positions every 2 · 10 3 timesteps. For the different membranes, we typically use Nseeds = 4 random initial seeds. For pure bolalipid membranes at kbola = 0 kBT ,we use Nseeds = 16 random initial seeds to increase the statistics.   

> II. SIMULATION ANALYSIS A. Measurement of the reduced volume

Pure bolalipid membranes In order to measure the reduced volume of pure bolalipid mem-branes we first build a surface mesh with Ovito from the set of lipid beads using the alpha-shape method with radius 2 σ and smoothing level 10. From the surface mesh we compute the surface area A and the enclosed volume V , which allows us, using Eq. (5), to calculate the reduced volume ν. We compute ν along the trajectory every 2 · 10 4 simulation steps. For each molecular rigidity kbola , we average ν for Nseeds = 4 seeds and calculate the mean and standard error of the mean. We note that for some time points along the trajectory the construction of the surface mesh fails ( ν = 0), which we ignore when calculating the average of ν. Also when transient membrane pores start to open ( kbola ≤ 1 kBT ), ν cannot be computed. For kbola > 1 kBT the toroidal vesicles break within 2 · 10 5 timesteps, which is why we do not compute ν in this case. The results of the analysis are shown in Fig. 2B. 

Membrane mixtures of bilayer and bolalipids We repeat the procedure as outlined for pure bolalipid membranes. The results of the analysis are shown in Fig. 3B. For fbi = 0 .1, the mean of ν cannot be computed along the full trajectory because the membrane breaks and forms transient pores.  

> B. Theoretical value of the reduced volume for the Clifford torus

In this section, we calculate the theoretical value of the reduced volume νClifford for the Clifford torus. The volume and surface area of a torus are given by 

Vtorus = 2 π2r2cross Rring , (S6) 

Atorus = 4 π2Rring rcross . (S7) 4Thus, for the Clifford torus with Rring /r cross = √2, the reduced volume according to Eq. (5) is given by 

νClifford = 3VClifford 

4π   AClifford 

> 4π

3/2 = 32

r rcross 

πR ring 

= 32

s

1

π√2 ≈ 0.712 . (S8) The result is shown in Figs. 2B and 3B. The observed small deviation of the reduced volume ν

for the simulated torus from the theoretical value νClifford is expected due to finite thickness of the membrane. While in the calculation the Clifford torus is parametrized for the mid-plane of the membrane, in the simulation the enclosed volume is calculated from the outer surface mesh, effectively increasing the reduced volume.  

> C. Quantifying the number of membrane handles or pores

To measure the number of membrane handles or pores, we use the surface mesh constructed in Ovito as described above. Because of the finite thickness of the simulated membranes, we reconstruct two surface meshes for a closed toroidal vesicle that represent the outer and inner surface layer of the membrane. As soon as the toroidal vesicle breaks, we only reconstruct a single surface mesh. The surface mesh is given by the number of vertices V , edges E and faces F . Following Euler’s polyhedron formula, we can calculate the genus g of the mesh by 

g = N − (V + F − E)/2, where N is the number of surfaces. Since we can have either two surface meshes (as long as the membrane has not ruptured) or one in our simulations, the interpretation of g depends on ν. For ν > 0, the genus g represents the number of handles of the membrane. In this case, we correct for the fact that the calculation is performed on two surface meshes and divide the obtained g by 2. Thus, we expect g = 1 for a torus and g = 0 for a sphere. If ν can no longer be computed because the membrane is no longer closed, g denotes the number of pores perforating the membrane. Thus, we expect g = n for an open surface containing n pores. We compute g throughout the simulation trajectories every 2 · 10 4 simulation steps. For each molecular rigidity kbola or bilayer fraction fbi , we average g over Nseeds = 4 independent seeds and calculate the mean and standard error of the mean. The results of the analysis are shown in Fig. 2C and Fig. 3C.  

> D. Global fraction of u-shaped bolalipids

Pure bolalipid membranes To measure the confirmation of bolalipids, we evaluate the angle θ between vectors that connect the central beads and the head beads for every simulation timestep. Based on θ, we classify bolalipids as straight ( θ < π/ 2) or u-shaped ( θ ≥ π/ 2). By averaging over all lipids, we calculate the global fraction of u-shaped bolalipids uf for one timestep. Fig. S1 shows uf as a function of time for different values of kbola . In all cases, we find similar results for independent simulation seeds. For kbola = 0 kBT , the u-shaped bolalipid fraction uf rapidly increases and then saturates (Fig. S1A). To determine the saturation level for each of the seeds, we fit an exponential function 

u1f (t) = u0f (1 − exp( −t/τ )), with the saturation level u0f and the saturation time scale τ . We average the different values for u0f and plot the result in Fig. 2D. For kbola = 1 kBT (Fig. S1B), 

uf exhibits an initial increase followed by saturation, after which it decreases before reaching its final saturation state. The decrease is associated with the transition from torus shape to sphere (Fig. 2A). This observation suggests that membrane shape and specifically membrane curvature globally enforce u-shaped bolalipids. We fit a constant u2f (t) = u0f to the second saturation 50 1 2 3 4

timesteps ts / 10 6

0

0.1 

0.2 

0.3 

0.4 

0.5 

0.6 

> u-shaped bolalipids fraction  uf

A                

> kbola = 0 kBT,s= 1
> kbola = 0 kBT,s= 2
> kbola = 0 kBT,s= 3
> kbola = 0 kBT,s= 4

0 1 2 3 4

timesteps ts / 10 6

0.02 

0.04 

0.06 

0.08 

0.10 

> u-shaped bolalipids fraction  uf

B                

> kbola = 1 kBT,s= 1
> kbola = 1 kBT,s= 2
> kbola = 1 kBT,s= 3
> kbola = 1 kBT,s= 4

0 1 2 3 4

timesteps ts / 10 6

0.010 

0.015 

0.020 

0.025 

> u-shaped bolalipids fraction  uf

C                

> kbola = 2 kBT,s= 1
> kbola = 2 kBT,s= 2
> kbola = 2 kBT,s= 3
> kbola = 2 kBT,s= 4

0 1 2 3 4

timesteps ts / 10 6

0.002 

0.004 

0.006 

0.008 

0.010 

> u-shaped bolalipids fraction  uf

D                

> kbola = 3 kBT,s= 1
> kbola = 3 kBT,s= 2
> kbola = 3 kBT,s= 3
> kbola = 3 kBT,s= 4

0 1 2 3 4

timesteps ts / 10 6

0.001 

0.002 

0.003 

0.004 

> u-shaped bolalipids fraction  uf

E                

> kbola = 4 kBT,s= 1
> kbola = 4 kBT,s= 2
> kbola = 4 kBT,s= 3
> kbola = 4 kBT,s= 4

0 1 2 3 4

timesteps ts / 10 6

0.0000 

0.0005 

0.0010 

0.0015 

> u-shaped bolalipids fraction  uf

F                

> kbola = 5 kBT,s= 1
> kbola = 5 kBT,s= 2
> kbola = 5 kBT,s= 3
> kbola = 5 kBT,s= 4

Figure S1. Fraction of u-shaped bolalipids as a function of time for increasing bolalipid rigidity kbola 

(A-F). From fits to the data (see text), we determine the steady state value of the fraction of u-shaped bolalipids u0f . We average the values of u0f for the different seeds and show the results in Fig. 2D. Data shown is based on Nseeds = 4 random initial seeds. 

phase (cf. Fig. S1B), average u0f over the different seeds and plot the result in Fig. 2D. For 

kbola ≥ 2 kBT (Fig. S1C-F), we observe that uf slightly increases in the initial toroidal state and subsequently decreases as the membranes breaks and becomes flat. We fit a relaxation function 

u3f (t) = ui

f exp( −t/τ ) + u0f , where ui

f is the initial fraction of u-shaped bolalipids, average u0f over different seeds and plot the result in Fig. 2D. We compare our results with previous measurements for the u-shaped bolalipid fraction uf for flat membranes [19]. It was found that uf (kbola ) = 1 /(1 + exp( β(−0.16 kBT + 3 kbola ))), where 60 1 2 3 4

timesteps ts / 10 6    

> 0.010
> 0.015
> 0.020
> 0.025
> u-shaped bolalipids fraction  uf A
> fbi =0.1,s=1
> fbi =0.1,s=2
> fbi =0.1,s=3
> fbi =0.1,s=4
> 01234

timesteps ts / 10 6    

> 0.005
> 0.010
> 0.015
> 0.020
> 0.025
> u-shaped bolalipids fraction  uf B
> fbi =0.2,s=1
> fbi =0.2,s=2
> fbi =0.2,s=3
> fbi =0.2,s=4
> 01234

timesteps ts / 10 6    

> 0.005
> 0.010
> 0.015
> 0.020
> u-shaped bolalipids fraction  uf C
> fbi =0.3,s=1
> fbi =0.3,s=2
> fbi =0.3,s=3
> fbi =0.3,s=4
> 01234

timesteps ts / 10 6    

> 0.005
> 0.010
> 0.015
> u-shaped bolalipids fraction  uf D
> fbi =0.4,s=1
> fbi =0.4,s=2
> fbi =0.4,s=3
> fbi =0.4,s=4
> 01234

timesteps ts / 10 6    

> 0.004
> 0.006
> 0.008
> 0.010
> 0.012
> 0.014
> 0.016
> u-shaped bolalipids fraction  uf E
> fbi =0.5,s=1
> fbi =0.5,s=2
> fbi =0.5,s=3
> fbi =0.5,s=4
> 01234

timesteps ts / 10 6    

> 0.006
> 0.008
> 0.010
> 0.012
> 0.014
> 0.016
> u-shaped bolalipids fraction  uf F
> fbi =0.6,s=1
> fbi =0.6,s=2
> fbi =0.6,s=3
> fbi =0.6,s=4
> 01234

timesteps ts / 10 6    

> 0.006
> 0.008
> 0.010
> 0.012
> 0.014
> 0.016
> 0.018
> u-shaped bolalipids fraction  uf G
> fbi =0.7,s=1
> fbi =0.7,s=2
> fbi =0.7,s=3
> fbi =0.7,s=4
> 01234

timesteps ts / 10 6    

> 0.005
> 0.010
> 0.015
> 0.020
> u-shaped bolalipids fraction  uf H
> fbi =0.8,s=1
> fbi =0.8,s=2
> fbi =0.8,s=3
> fbi =0.8,s=4
> 01234

timesteps ts / 10 6

> 0.000
> 0.005
> 0.010
> 0.015
> 0.020
> 0.025
> 0.030
> u-shaped bolalipids fraction  uf I
> fbi =0.9,s=1
> fbi =0.9,s=2
> fbi =0.9,s=3
> fbi =0.9,s=4

Figure S2. Fraction of u-shaped bolalipids as a function of time for increasing bilayer fraction fbi (A-I). From fits to the data (see text), we determine the steady state value of the fraction of u-shaped bolalipids 

u0f . We average the values of u0f for the different seeds and show the results in Fig. 3D. Data shown is based on Nseeds = 4 random initial seeds. 

β = 1 /(kBT ), describes the data. We note that in this case, a value of ϵp = 1 /1.2kBT was used for kbola = 0. The result is shown in Fig. 2D as a gray line. 

Membrane mixtures of bilayer and bolalipids To measure the global fraction of u-shaped bolalipids for mixture membranes, we plot uf as a function of time in Fig. S2. For fbi = 0 .1 − 0.6(Fig. S2A-F) we use u3f (t) and for fbi = 0 .7 − 0.9 (Fig. S2G-I) we use u2f (t) to fit the data. We average u0f over the different seeds and plot the result in Fig. 3D. 

E. Analysis of the geometry of toroidal vesicles 

In this section, we explain how we analyze the geometry of toroidal vesicles. First, we extract the positions of all membrane beads for each timestep of the simulation, which we center around the center of mass. We then map the Cartesian coordinates ( x, y, z ) of the membrane beads to spherical coordinates with radius R = px2 + y2 + z2 and angle θ = arcsin( z/R ). Assuming rotational symmetry around the z-axis, we neglect to map the polar angle ϕ. Then, all membrane bead coordinates are given in the χz −plane with χ = R cos θ and z. We minimize the function 

f (R, θ ; Rring , r cross ) = r2cross − (Rring − χ)2 − z to determine the ring radius Rring and the cross section radius rcross . We compute Rring and rcross along the trajectories every 2 · 10 3 simulation steps. 70 1 2 3 4

timesteps ts / 10 6

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

> ring radius  Rring

A    

> kbola = 0 kBT, mean
> kbola = 0 kBT, seed=16
> ste of replica means

0 1 2 3 4

timesteps ts / 10 6

14 

15 

16 

17 

> cross radius  rcross

B    

> kbola = 0 kBT, mean
> kbola = 0 kBT, seed=16
> ste of replica means

0 1 2 3 4

timesteps ts / 10 6

1.2 

1.4 

1.6 

> aspect ratio  Rring /rcross

C    

> kbola = 0 kBT, mean
> kbola = 0 kBT, seed=16
> ste of replica means
> Clifford torus

0 1 2 3 4

timesteps ts / 10 6

4

6

8

> hole radius  Rring  rcross

D    

> kbola = 0 kBT, mean
> kbola = 0 kBT, seed=16
> ste of replica means

Figure S3. Geometrical analysis of toroidal vesicles of pure bolalipid membranes at kbola = 0 kBT . (A) Ring radius as a function of time. (B) Cross section radius as a function of time. (C) Toroidal aspect ratio as a function of time. (D) Hole radius as a function of time. Data shown is based on Nseeds = 16 random initial seeds. 

In Fig. S3, we analyze the geometrical quantities of toroidal vesicles composed of bolalipids at kbola = 0 kBT . We show mean values averaged over different seeds, their standard error and a single trajectory. We find that the ring radius Rring (A), the cross section radius rcross (B), the toroidal aspect ratio ρ = Rring /r cross (C) and the hole radius Rring − rcross (D) change only little over time, implying the torus shape is stable. In Figs. S4-S6, we provide the corresponding analysis for mixture membranes. To summarize the data, the different quantities are averaged along the mean trajectories starting after 1 · 10 6 timesteps until the end of the trajectories. The results for the toroidal aspect ratios are shown in Table II. 

F. Local fraction of u-shaped bolalipids and bilayer lipids 

Local fraction of u-shaped bolalipids In this section, we explain how we determine the local fraction of u-shaped bolalipids. We average over Nseeds = 16 trajectories of Clifford tori in steady state with trajectories of 4 · 10 6 timesteps measured after an initial equilibrium phase of 1 · 10 6 timesteps (Fig. 4A left). We extract the position of the membrane lipids every 2 · 10 3

simulation steps, corrected for the center of mass position. Similar to the geometrical analysis, we map the Cartesian coordinates ( x, y, z ) to spherical coordinates ( R, θ ) and determine the ring 8radius Rring and the cross section radius rcross . For all membrane lipids, we then determine the toroidal angle ϑ = arctan( R cos θ − Rring /z ). The process can be thought of as cutting thin slices of the torus for all azimuthal angles φ and stacking them on each other (Fig. 4A right). We then distribute the lipids in equally populated bins and calculate the u-shaped bolalipid fraction uf

in every bin. This can be though of as representing the lipid position along a circle with the position parametrized by the toroidal angle ϑ, where ϑ = 0 represents the top, ϑ = −π/ 2 the inner shell, ϑ = π/ 2 the outer shell and ϑ = ±π the bottom (Fig. 4A bottom). We average uf

and plot the mean value and its error as a function of ϑ in Fig. 4B. 

Local fraction of bilayer lipids To determine the local fraction of bilayer lipids, we re-peat the procedure described above for u-shaped bolalipids. Instead of u-shaped and straight bolalipids, we now distinguish between bolalipids and bilayer lipids. fbi as a function of ϑ for 

fbi = 0 .7 is shown in Fig. 4D and Fig. S7A. Moreover, fbi as a function of ϑ for fbi = 0 .8 and 

fbi = 0 .9 are shown Figs. S7B and C.  

> III. SUPPLEMENTAL VIDEOS

Video S1 Pure bolalipid membranes at different bolalipid rigidities kbola . At vanishing bolalipid rigidity ( kbola = 0 kBT ), the toroidal vesicle remains stable. At moderate bolalipid rigidity (kbola = 1 kBT ), the toroidal vesicle transitions smoothly into a spherical vesicle. For stiff bolalipids (bolalipid rigidity kbola = 2 kBT ), the toroidal vesicle ruptures. 

Video S2 Archaeal mixture membranes with varying bilayer lipid fraction fbi . At a low bilayer lipid fraction ( fbi = 0 .1), the toroidal vesicle transitions into a spherical vesicle exhibiting transient pores. At an intermediate bilayer lipid fraction ( fbi = 0.3), the toroidal vesicle transitions smoothly into a spherical vesicle. At a large bilayer lipid fraction ( fbi = 0 .7), the toroidal vesicle remains stable. 90 1 2 3 4

timesteps ts / 10 6

20 

22 

24 

> ring radius  Rring

A  

> fbi = 0.7, mean
> fbi = 0.7, seed=4
> ste of replica means

0 1 2 3 4

timesteps ts / 10 6

14 

15 

16 

17 

> cross radius  rcross

B  

> fbi = 0.7, mean
> fbi = 0.7, seed=4
> ste of replica means

0 1 2 3 4

timesteps ts / 10 6

1.2 

1.4 

1.6 

> aspect ratio  Rring /rcross

C  

> fbi = 0.7, mean
> fbi = 0.7, seed=4
> ste of replica means
> Clifford torus

0 1 2 3 4

timesteps ts / 10 6

4

6

8

10 

> hole radius  Rring  rcross

D  

> fbi = 0.7, mean
> fbi = 0.7, seed=4
> ste of replica means

Figure S4. Geometrical analysis of toroidal vesicles of mixed membranes at fbi = 0 .7. (A) Ring radius as a function of time. (B) Cross section radius as a function of time. (C) Toroidal aspect ratio as a function of time. (D) Hole radius as a function of time. Data shown is based on Nseeds = 4 random initial seeds. 10 0 1 2 3 4

timesteps ts / 10 6

20 

22 

24 

> ring radius  Rring

A  

> fbi = 0.8, mean
> fbi = 0.8, seed=4
> ste of replica means

0 1 2 3 4

timesteps ts / 10 6

14 

15 

16 

17 

> cross radius  rcross

B  

> fbi = 0.8, mean
> fbi = 0.8, seed=4
> ste of replica means

0 1 2 3 4

timesteps ts / 10 6

1.2 

1.4 

1.6 

> aspect ratio  Rring /rcross

C  

> fbi = 0.8, mean
> fbi = 0.8, seed=4
> ste of replica means
> Clifford torus

0 1 2 3 4

timesteps ts / 10 6

4

6

8

10 

> hole radius  Rring  rcross

D  

> fbi = 0.8, mean
> fbi = 0.8, seed=4
> ste of replica means

Figure S5. Geometrical analysis of toroidal vesicles of mixed membranes at fbi = 0 .8. (A) Ring radius as a function of time. (B) Cross section radius as a function of time. (C) Toroidal aspect ratio as a function of time. (D) Hole radius as a function of time. Data shown is based on Nseeds = 4 random initial seeds. 11 0 1 2 3 4

timesteps ts / 10 6

18 

20 

22 

24 

> ring radius  Rring

A  

> fbi = 0.9, mean
> fbi = 0.9, seed=4
> ste of replica means

0 1 2 3 4

timesteps ts / 10 6

14 

15 

16 

17 

> cross radius  rcross

B  

> fbi = 0.9, mean
> fbi = 0.9, seed=4
> ste of replica means

0 1 2 3 4

timesteps ts / 10 6

1.2 

1.4 

1.6 

> aspect ratio  Rring /rcross

C  

> fbi = 0.9, mean
> fbi = 0.9, seed=4
> ste of replica means
> Clifford torus

0 1 2 3 4

timesteps ts / 10 6

2

4

6

8

10 

> hole radius  Rring  rcross

D  

> fbi = 0.9, mean
> fbi = 0.9, seed=4
> ste of replica means

Figure S6. Geometrical analysis of toroidal vesicles of mixed membranes at fbi = 0 .9. (A) Ring radius as a function of time. (B) Cross section radius as a function of time. (C) Toroidal aspect ratio as a function of time. (D) Hole radius as a function of time. Data shown is based on Nseeds = 4 random initial seeds. 

Figure S7. The bilayer lipid fraction fbi as a function of ϑ (solid black line) with standard error (gray area) for fbi = 0 .7 (A), fbi = 0 .8 (B) and fbi = 0 .9 (C). Along with fbi , the scaled squared mean curvature ˜H2 (solid red line) and the scaled Gaussian curvature ˜K (solid purple line) are plotted. Data shown is based on Nseeds = 4 random initial seeds. 12 

Figure S8. The bilayer lipid fraction fbi as a function of the reduced squared mean curvature H2 · r2cross 

(red) and a linear fit to the data (solid black line) for fbi = 0 .7 (A), fbi = 0 .8 (B), and fbi = 0 .9 (C). Data shown is based on Nseeds = 4 random initial seeds.