Title: Evolving Symbiosis, from Barricelli's Legacy to Collective Intelligence: a simulated and conceptual approach

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.08463v1

Published Time: Tue, 10 Mar 2026 02:37:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 48

Markdown Content:
Artificial Life Manuscript Submission 

# Evolving Symbiosis, from Barricelli’s Legacy to Collective Intelligence: a simulated and conceptual approach 

James Ashford 1, Marko Cvjetko 2, Richard J.G. Löffler 3, Berfin Sakallioglu 4, Alessandro Valerio 5, Marta Tataryn 3, Benedikt Hartl 6, Léo Pio-Lopez 6, Stefano Nichele 7

Corresponding: Stefano Nichele ( stefano.nichele@hiof.no ) 

> 1. Independent Researcher, Oxford, UK 2. Inria Center at the University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France 3. University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark 4. University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy 5. Gran Sasso Science Institute, L’Aquila, Italy 6. Allen Discovery Center at Tufts University, Medford, USA 7. Østfold University College, Halden, Norway

Abstract. This report documents the work of our group (named SymBa) at the ALICE 2026 workshop in Copenhagen. Inspired by the pioneer-ing work by Nils Aall Barricelli on symbiogenesis of numerical organisms (i.e., 1D cellular automata) in 1953 (70+ years ago!!), we discussed the role of symbiogenesis as mechanism contributing to the origins of life, open-endedness, and collective intelligence. We report replications of Barricelli’s original work in 1D worlds, an extension to 2D symbioorgan-isms, and preliminary experimentation with DNA-norms. We discuss the implications of symbiogenesis for artifical life and artificial intelligence, and outline several opportunities for future works, both at the concep-tual level as well as using different substrates (neural networks, neural cellular automata, etc.) 

Keywords: Symbiogenesis, Barricelli, Collective Intelligence. 

> arXiv:2603.08463v1 [cs.NE] 9 Mar 2026

Figure 1: Extract from original paper by Barricelli published in Italian (Barricelli et al., 1954). 

# 1 Introduction 

Why do living organisms exist? This question was addressed in 1954 by Nils Aall Barricelli (Barricelli et al., 1954) (see scanned snapshot of the original paper in Fig. 1), one of the founding fathers of artificial life, using numeric symbioorganisms (one dimensional cellular automata). In his Cellular Automata (CA) models, reproduction and mutation were not sufficient to explain the origin of an evolutionary process (and therefore the origins of life). He proposed that the missing ingredient was symbiogenesis, the creation of a new entity out of a mutually beneficial relationship between two pre-existing entities. Barricelli’s work has not been fully appreciated, however it is still very relevant today. In this paper we will review Barricelli’s ideas on symbiogenesis, recent ideas, and identify future directions and open questions. 

Opening – Two original questions to be explored: 

1. When do symbiotic associations become more permanent, and what is the bene-fit/motivation of that?! This is an important ingredient for explaining origin of life, i.e., kickstart the emergence of replicators. 1Figure 2: An emergent symbioorganism from Barricelli’s work. 2. Is symbiogenesis benificial (or even required) for open-endedness? 

Central motivation for this report :• Biology showed that replication and collaboration works with physics/chemistry. • Barricelli showed in 1953 that it also works with math (numerical organisms). • Recently, the importance of symbiotic approaches to (artificial) intelligence and (a)life has been undergoing a renaissance (see, e.g., ”Computational Life: How Well-formed, Self-replicating Programs Emerge from Simple Interaction” (Agüera y Arcas et al., 2024), or more comprehensively ”What is Intelligence?” (Agüera y Arcas, 2025)) • We thus ask: How does symbiogenesis relate to our modern scientific and technolog-ical views (spanning Machine Learning, generative AI, collective intelligence, diverse intelligence, etc.)? And how does this relate to our improved understanding of biol-ogy (see, e.g., Fields and Levin, 2020, 2022; Levin, 2022, 2023; Levin and Watson, 2026; McMillen and Levin, 2024)? 22 Historical Ideas of Barricelli 

• First known experiments on artificial organisms and simulated evolution (Barricelli et al., 1954; Barricelli, 1957, 1962, 1963) • IMPORTANT NOTE: there is evidence today that major evolutionary transitions, such as the one from eukaryotes to prokaryotes, were the result of symbiogenetic events (Szathmáry & Smith, 1995). There is additional evidence by looking at the human genome, where only a small part codes for proteins and a much larger part codes for retroviruses that are integrated in our genome Agüera y Arcas, 2025 • “The first sexually reproducing organisms have arisen as a result of a symbiosis be-tween self-reproducing elements (genes), e.g., DNA or protein molecules with the capacity to reproduce by autocatalytic processes and the capacity to undergo cer-tain hereditary changes (mutations).” • ”Genes were originally independent organisms which have united by symbiosis to form a kind of primitive chromosome“ • “Even though the original genes individually had a very limited reportoire of muta-tions capable of producing viable varieties, … symbiosis might lead to the formation of organisms with a much larger repertoire of mutations …” • Barricelli’s goals: 1) Support a symbiogenetic theory of the origin of life (Darwinian evolution alone is not sufficient to explain how life started) 2) Observe how a symbiogenetic evolution process starts and initially develops by hereditary changes and selection; is symbiogenetic evolution open-ended? • Artificial organisms are numbers in a 1D finite discrete space (512 cells on the IAS machine due to only 5 Kb of memory), time is discrete (generations), organisms must have rules for reproduction, mutation, and interaction. 0 = empty cell, Non-3zero natural number = a gene • Multi-gene individuals emerge spontaneously (see Fig. 2) only if elements (num-bers) on the grid are allowed to replicate (in his work this is implemented by shift rules moving numbers to a shifted location equivalent to their values, positive to the right and negative to the left), to mutate (when two numbers collide on the same lo-cation, a mutated version is produced for example by summing them or killing them both - note that Barricelli proposed different policies called norms), and to inter-act via symbiosis (multiple replications could occur via interacting numbers, that is when a number lands on a location occupied by another number at the previous generation; in that case, the shifted number would replicate a second time in a loca-tion shifted from its original location of a quantity dictated by the interacting number present at the previous generation). See Fig. 3 • Additional findings by Barricelli: 

– emergent sexual recombination via crossover (see Fig. 4) 

– uniform worlds governed by a single norm show symbioorganism emergence but not open-ended evolution 

– quasi-uniform CA where different rules are applied in different patches of the environment show prolongued dynamics 

– parasitism emerges where organisms cannot replicate alone but only in the presence of a host organisms (which may survive or die) 

– self-repairing organisms would emerge (see Fig. 5) • Barricelli suggests that DNA is using symbiogenetic interaction norms (nucleotides have specific association rules) and drafts a possible experiment to show that sin-gle nucleotides (an abstract computational system working on an alphabet of four symbols) and computational symbiogenetic norms could produce the emergence of 4Figure 3: Example of symbiotic interactions causing mutiple replications that would not have happened without symbiosis. 

Figure 4: Example of emergent crossover. self-replicating double stranded symbioorganisms, see Fig. 6 • Barricelli runs the (likely) first experiment of evolutionary computation (see Fig 7). He writes: “we must give the genes some toy bricks to play with, … some material they may organise and use in the competition among different symbioorganisms”. He runs experiments where two symbioorganisms competing to replicate in the same lo-cation would play a game (TacTix, where the strings of numbers of each symbioorgan-ism would encode for playing strategies). The one that won the game would get the right to reproduce. This selective pressure produced organisms that acquired bet-ter strategies over evolution (i.e., learning), therefore encoding both self-replicating programs as well as functional programs to play the game. • Code repo for reproducing various Barricelli’s experiments (and more!) https://github.com/JELAshford/symba-alice-2026 

5Figure 5: Example of emergent crossover. 

# 3 Background 

This background will cover aspects related to ALife, such as: • Symbiosis, symbiogenesis, endosymbiosis, mutualism, commensalism, amensalism, competition • History in biology and machine learning (ML) / Artificial Ingtellicence (AI) • Definitions in ML, Symbiotic Organism Search (SOS) algorithms and survey, loss of Barricelli’s original ideas 

# 3.1 Restrictive vs broad definition of symbiosis in biology 

Heinrich Anton de Bary coined the term in 1879, defining symbiosis broadly as “the living together of unlike organisms” @. This original definition explicitly included all types of close, long-term interactions between different species—mutualism, commensalism, and parasitism @. Shortly after de Bary’s definition, some biologists began restricting “sym-6Figure 6: Example of DNA norms proposed by Barricelli. 

Figure 7: Example of evolutionary computation and embodiement proposed by Barricelli. biosis” to mean only mutualistic relationships where both organisms benefit. This restric-tive usage likely stems from everyday language where “symbiosis” implies cooperation. The confusion was compounded by prominent biologists like Hertwig (1906) who reversed his own earlier position and promoted the restrictive view @. By the late 20th century, a “growing consensus in the biological literature” emerged favoring de Bary’s original broad definition @. Modern sources increasingly define symbiosis as “any close and long-term biological interaction between two organisms of different species,” with mutualism as one specific type. Lynn Margulis adopted and promoted the broad definition in their work on endosymbiosis and holobiont theory @. Contemporary textbooks and encyclopedias now predominantly use this framework, though the restrictive usage persists in popular dis-course. In the rest of this study, we will use the broad definition: symbiosis as “the living together of unlike organisms” including all beneficial (mutualism, commensalism), neu-tral and harmful interactions (amensalism, competition). From this perspective, we can 7visualize a continuum between antagonistic and cooperative symbiotic relationships. 

# 3.2 Related Works 

3.2.1 Biological Symbiogenesis Theory 

The biological case for symbiogenesis as a major evolutionary force was made most influ-entially by Margulis, whose Serial Endosymbiosis Theory (SET) proposed that mitochondria and chloroplasts originated as free-living bacteria that entered into obligate symbiotic re-lationships with their host cells, driving the emergence of eukaryotic complexity (Margulis, 1970). Margulis adopted de Bary’s broad definition of symbiosis (discussed in Section 3.1) and placed it within an evolutionary framework in which symbiogenesis, not merely gradual mutation and selection, is a principal engine of major evolutionary transitions (Szathmáry & Smith, 1995). Her work motivates the computational investigations pursued in this report: if symbiogenesis can drive the emergence of complex life from simpler biological entities, can analogous processes produce emergent complexity in computational substrates? 

3.2.2 Barricelli’s Computational Symbiogenesis 

Barricelli’s work on numerical symbiogenesis, reviewed in detail in Section 2, is the most direct predecessor of the present study. Across a series of publications from 1954 to 1963 (Barricelli et al., 1954; Barricelli, 1957, 1962, 1963), he showed that simple numerical organisms in a one-dimensional cellular automaton could, through replication, mutation, and symbiotic interaction, give rise to self-reproducing multi-gene structures he called symbioorganisms. Replication and mutation alone produced limited variability, whereas symbiotic association allowed even elements with only two allelic states to form organisms with 2n varieties (Barricelli, 1962). Fogel gives a historical account positioning Barricelli as a pioneer of artificial life decades before the field was formalized (Fogel, 2006). Our work builds on Barricelli’s framework: we replicate and extend his 1D systems with quantitative 8analysis, generalize them to two dimensions, and introduce DNA-inspired norms that he proposed but never implemented. 

3.2.3 Self-Replication in Computational Systems 

Von Neumann introduced self-reproducing cellular automata based on a universal con-structor (Von Neumann & Burks, 1966), and Langton later showed that self-reproduction could be achieved with far simpler structures using minimal self-reproducing loops (Lang-ton, 1984). Both focused on engineering individual replicators. Barricelli’s approach differs in that complex self-replicating structures are not designed but emerge from populations of simple interacting elements. A separate line of work explored self-replication and evolution in assembly-like computa-tional substrates. Pargellis showed evolutionary emergence in the Amoeba system, where programs composed of assembly-like instructions could evolve through variation and se-lection (Pargellis, 1996). This tradition, surveyed by Taylor et al. from von Neumann through Tierra and Avida to modern systems (Taylor & Dorin, 2020), shares with Barricelli’s numer-ical organisms the elements of self-replication and open-ended evolution. These systems generally lack symbiogenesis mechanisms, however: organisms evolve through mutation and selection but do not form persistent cooperative associations that give rise to new kinds of entities. Agüera y Arcas et al. (2024) showed that well-formed, self-replicating programs can emerge from random Brainfuck family (BFF) programs through interaction alone, without explicit fitness landscapes. Their work introduced high-order entropy as a measure of emergent complexity and a token-tracing methodology for tracking gene ancestry. Interestingly, the parallel to Barricelli’s symbioorganisms is quite close: in both systems, self-replicating structures arise not by design but as consequences of local interaction rules. The Com-putational Life framework operates with a fixed interpreter (the BFF compiler), however, 9whereas Barricelli’s norms define the interaction rules themselves, a distinction we return to in Section 7. Nearly all of the systems above operate on one-dimensional substrates. Higher-dimensional CAs have been explored elsewhere, particularly in the Game of Life tradition and in Lenia (Chan, 2019), but none of these incorporate the shift-based replication and collision norms central to Barricelli’s framework. Barricelli himself speculated that similarly complex dy-namics might emerge in two-dimensional variants of his automaton, but to the best of our knowledge he never implemented or published such experiments. Our 2D extension (Section 5.2) addresses this gap. 

3.2.4 Symbiogenesis in Evolutionary Theory and Computation 

Several lines of theoretical work have sought to formalize the conditions under which sym-biogenesis can drive evolutionary transitions. Bull and Fogarty (1995) modeled when en-dosymbiosis becomes advantageous. Watson and Pollack showed that symbiotic com-position enables evolutionary transitions by allowing hierarchical organization: entities that could not solve complex problems individually can do so when composed symbiot-ically (R. A. Watson & Pollack, 2001, 2003). Daida extended symbiogenesis to complex adaptive systems more broadly (Daida et al., 1996), while Egbert et al. (2023) argued that self-organization and interaction patterns, which are central to Barricelli’s requirement that symbiotic cooperation precede complex evolution, are precursors to biological organiza-tion itself. We find that these contributions bear on the phenomena we observe in our own replications, where cooperative structures emerge and persist as replicating units. Within evolutionary computation, several algorithms have adopted the label “symbiotic,” though most use the term loosely. The Symbiotic Evolutionary Algorithm of Halavati and Shouraki (2009) and Halavati et al. (2007) addresses linkage problems by allowing cooper-ative relationships between gene groups, inspired by Barricelli’s observation that symbiosis 10 enables complex trait evolution. It treats symbiosis as a heuristic for gene grouping, rather than as an emergent dependency between interacting entities. Symbiogenesis has also been explored as a mechanism for building complex adaptive systems in genetic program-ming (Heywood & Lichodzijewski, 2010), with benchmarking studies validating the scala-bility of symbiotic coevolutionary approaches (Doucette et al., 2012). What these methods share, in our view, is that they impose symbiotic structure as an algorithmic design choice rather than allowing it to emerge from the dynamics of the system, as it does in Barricelli’s original framework and in the experiments we present here. 

3.2.5 Biochemical and Computational Analogies 

Akhlaghpour (2022) argued that RNA can serve as the basis for natural universal com-putation through self-replication and catalysis, identifying combinator operators in base-pairing and splicing that render RNA Turing-complete. Holland’s work on genetic operators (Holland, 1992) formalizes variation and recombination in abstract computational terms. Both of these perspectives are relevant to the DNA-norm expansion we introduce in Sec-tion 5. Barricelli proposed extending his numerical norms toward a more explicitly DNA-like regime in his later writings but, as far as we are aware, never implemented them. Our minimal DNA-norms (elongation, complementary association, and strand separation in a nucleotide soup) are a first step toward connecting Barricelli’s abstract numerical symbio-genesis with the biochemistry of replication. 

# 4 Extending Views on Symbiosis 

# 4.1 Symbiosis, a multiscale phenomenon in biology and evolution 

Many parasites and pathogens fill the definition of symbiosis. We can include low-virulence ones like Helicobacter pylori, known to infect the stomach of mammals and discovered as 11 a driver of stomach cancer, Chlamydia bacteria, or herpes viruses. Another emblematic case of symbiosis is endosymbiosis, more specifically the process by which an organism is integrated in another for the benefits of both species. Symbiosis drove the evolution of eukaryotic complexity—mitochondria and chloroplasts originated as free-living bacteria that became obligate symbionts. 

An important question is whether symbiogenesis should be understood purely as an evolutionary phenomenon or whether analogous processes occur in non-evolutionary contexts such as development, physiology, or social organization. 

Classical accounts treat symbiogenesis as a macroevolutionary event in which previously independent replicators become permanently integrated into a new reproductive unit, as in the incorporation of mitochondria into eukaryotic cells Margulis, 1971, 1981; Smith and Sza-thmary, 1997. In this view, symbiogenesis produces a new evolutionary individual whose components can no longer reproduce independently. However, similar irreversible integra-tions may occur within the lifetime of an organism. Developmental processes often stabi-lize cooperative cellular collectives that cannot revert to their earlier autonomous states, for example when cells differentiate and become functionally integrated into tissues or organs. Likewise, symbiotic interactions with microbiota or other organisms can become developmentally entrenched, forming tightly coupled functional systems sometimes de-scribed as holobionts Gilbert et al., 2012. These cases suggest that symbiogenesis may be understood more broadly as a dynamical process in which initially independent agents become progressively integrated through feedback, coordination, and constraint until they form a new level of organization. Sim-ilar transitions appear in collective systems such as swarms or social groups, where co-ordinated interactions can produce higher-level entities with emergent regulatory prop-erties Okasha, 2006; West et al., 2015. In human societies, organizational structures– from institutions to scientific communities–also display forms of functional integration in 12 which the collective acquires capabilities not reducible to individual participants. From a connectionist perspective, such transitions can be interpreted as the emergence of new higher-level “modules” in which interactions among components become structured and canalized, enabling the collective to function as an adaptive unit and allowing evolving and, more generally, learning systems to exploit previously learned patterns of coordina-tion Kouvaris et al., 2017; R. A. Watson and Szathmáry, 2016; R. A. Watson et al., 2016, 2022. These observations motivate a dynamical view of individuality, in which individuals are not static objects but metastable patterns of interaction maintained through ongoing processes of coordination and constraint. From this perspective, individuality emerges when a collective achieves sufficient integration, causal closure, and alignment of function to behave as a coherent agent over time Godfrey-Smith, 2015. The transition from sym-biosis to symbiogenesis can thus be interpreted as a key mechanism by which collectives become individuals. 

# 4.2 Symbiosis as a process of collective intelligence 

By using the extended definition of symbiosis, we can find parallels between collective intelligence processes and symbiosis (mutualism, parasisitsm, commensalism). 

Mutualism = cooperative behavior = scaling of goals/intelligence/survival 

By sharing stress, cells can resolve more complex problems, allowing the scaling of goals (Levin, 2019; Pio-Lopez et al., 2023). Game-theoretic results shows also that when agents decide to merge, they increase their problem-solving capacities, see the game-theoretic results on agents and superagents Shreesha et al., 2025. 

Commensalism = neutral behavior (or that seems neutral) 

Studies have shown that unilateral relationships—such as commensalism and amensalism— can strengthen community stability more effectively than symmetric interactions like com-petition or mutualism (Mougi, 2016). Ecological communities that combine different types 13 of unilateral interactions tend to be more resilient, indicating that asymmetric relation-ships, where contributions are uneven, can foster robust collective behavior. 

Parasitism = Competition (that can be beneficial too) 

Collective intelligence is a process of cooperative/competition as multiple scales (R. Wat-son & Levin, 2023). Competition can be beneficial when we jump scale. Similarly to why parasitic behavior can be beneficial by reducing competitive pressure and increasing com-munity biodiversity, for example (Gómez & Nichols, 2013; Hatcher et al., 2012; Hudson et al., 2006). Intelligent behavior is proposed to arise from balancing cooperative and competitive dy-namics at the same time. Competition within a team can enhance collective intelligence when it boosts integrative information sharing while simultaneously increasing uncertainty for rival teams. Competition between teams imposes selection pressures that favor better coordinated groups, even in the absence of explicit coordination mechanisms (Hristovski & Balagué, 2020). 

# 5 Implementation of Barricelli Systems 

Barricelli conducted several experiments on symbiogenesis using a simple numerical sys-tem, however, his results were limited by the computational resources he had. We re-implemented the system he used in (Barricelli, 1957). The code repo for reproducing vari-ous Barricelli’s experiments (and more!) is available at the following link: https://github.com/JELAshford/symba-alice-2026 

# 5.1 1D Barricelli System 

Barricelli’s original system consisted of 1D arrays of integers stacked into a 2D array X,where Xa,g represents the value of the array at position a in generation g. To compute the 14 next generation, the algorithm does as follows: 1. A number n at position a in the 1D array attempts to replicate by copying itself into position a + n (Figure 8, top). If there is already a non-zero value m in that position, the 

n also attempts to copy into a + m (Figure 8, bottom). This process repeats until n copies into a previously unoccupied location, or attempts to copy into the same location twice. 2. If multiple numbers try to replicate into the same position, a norm (also referred to as a ‘mutation rule‘) is used to resolve the collision. The norms that Barricelli used are described in Table 1). 

Figure 8: Barricelli’s numerical system. On the top, an example of a single number replica-tion. In the bottom, the number 4 is replicated twice, due to interaction with the number -3. 

Figure 9: Barricelli’s symbioorganism. Barricelli reasoned about self-replicating sequences of numbers as symbioorganisms. One of the examples he provides is shown in 9. In (Barricelli, 1962), he claims these patterns share many properties with living organisms, such as self-replication, mutations, para-sitism, robustness to damage, and more. However, Barricelli lacked resources to verify and present these properties rigorously. 15 Table 1: Barricelli’s collision norms. 

Name of the norm Xag -value (computed by muta-tion or exclusion) Conditions 

Norm 0 0 Collision of different genes. Norm A 

u + v Collision under empty cell if 

Xa+u, g −1 and Xa−v, g −1 have same sign. 

−(u + v) Same collision if the sign is not the same. 

0 Collision under occupied cell. Norm B 

u + v − 1 Respectively same conditions as in A norms. 

−(u + v − 1) 0

Norm C Xa−v, g −1 − Xa+u, g −1 Collision under empty cell. 

0 Collision under occupied cell. Norm D −Xa, g −1 + 2 X(a+Xa, g −1), g −1 Collision if X(a+Xa, g −1), g −1 and 

X(a−Xa, g +1 ), g −1 are equal. 

0 Same collision if the two numbers are not equal. 

He also conducted several large scale experiments, up to 512 cells and 5000 generations (See Figure. He describes the outcome of these simulations as ”organized homogeneity”, i.e. a single ”simple symbioorganism” would take over, and the universe would enter peri-odic behavior. Barricelli claimed that several augmentations successfully solved this issue, including using multiple norms on the same grid and launching parallel simulations that periodically exchange their segments (Barricelli, 1957, 1962). 

# 5.2 2D Barricelli System 

Barricelli makes reference to 2D variants of this automata in multiple papers, speculating that similarly complicated dynamics that are seen in the 1D worlds might be exhibited there also. It appears that due to hardware or time constraints he was not able to share any examples of this behavior, so we have implemented it ourselves here .Our implementation follows an identical conceptual structure to the 1D case, with the ex-tension that instead of 1D array of integers for each timestep there is a 2D array of integer 16 Figure 10: Barricelli’s reports on large scale experiments. Left: Barricelli system initialized with random numbers converges towards symbioorganisms. Reproduced from Figure 15 of (Barricelli, 1962). Right: Barricelli system with heterogeneous norms, annotations de-marcate different norms and symbioorganisms. Reproduced from Figure 9 of (Barricelli, 1957). 

Figure 11: 6 examples of Barricelli’s numerical systems with 0 norm and periodic boundary conditions. The grid of length 256 is initialized with 10 random numbers in the center, the rest are 0. The simulations ran for 512 generations. pairs. These pairs describe a direction to move during replication, which is carried out exactly as in the 1D case, and then collisions are resolved with norms. In our experiments, the 0 and D norms can be used unmodified, as they consider either the presence or absence of a collision, or a step in the cell’s current ”direction” respectively -both of which are independent of the dimensionality of the substrate. As in the 1D cases, we observe that originally sparse starting conditions seed with pos-17 itive and negative numbers quickly organizes into denser fields with repeating and self-propagating patterns. 

Figure 12: Barricelli’s 0 norm executed on a 2D environment, with an 80% sparse ini-tialization and toroidal wrapping. Each point represent the 2D vector at that position by calculating it’s polar angle with atan 2 and applying a divergent color scheme. A video of the full run is available here .

# 5.3 DNA-norm Expansion 

Barricelli’s numerical symbiogenesis experiments showed that, even in a highly abstract one-dimensional medium, persistent patterns can reproduce, compete, and combine into higher-order ”symbioorganisms”. A central methodological point in that program is that the outcomes depend critically on the norms (i.e., the local laws that govern copying, vari-ation, and interaction). In later discussions, Barricelli suggested expanding these laws toward a more explicitly DNA-like regime. Motivated by that direction, we expand the symbiogenetic setting by replacing pattern-level replication rules with a minimal set of DNA-norms. We study these norms first in a well-mixed ”soup” of nucleotides (monomers) and polymers (single strand), with transient bound complexes; then we implement them in a spatially explicit 1D CA. The goal is to preserve Barricelli’s emphasis on emergence from local interactions while matching the mechanisms interpretable in molecular terms. 18 5.3.1 Minimal DNA-norms 

Our implementation represents the environment as a pool of monomers A, C, G, T and single-stranded polymers and double-stranded complexes. To make polymer growth and association well-defined, strands are treated as oriented sequences with a fixed polarity (a 5’ and 3’ end). Complementarity is defined by an involution: 

μ : {A, C, G, T } → { A, C, G, T }, μ(A) = T, μ (T ) = A, μ (C) = G, μ (G) = C, (1) This mapping defines which monomers can pair at a given template position. From here, we implement three norms: 1. Elongation (Monomer addition and polymer growth). Polymers grow by sequen-tial addition of monomers at the 3’ end, increasing strand length one nucleotide at a time. At each update a monomer is drawn from the pool (Fig. 13A). 2. Complementary association (pairing and overlap-mediated merging). An in-coming monomer may bind opposite an unpaired template base (pairing) within an existing single strand and filling gaps. The same pairing rule allows two strands to anneal when they share a sufficiently long contiguous complementary sequence; such annealing can align partial overlaps so that two fragments merge into a longer double strand than either fragment alone (Fig. 13B). (Fig. 13B). 3. Split (strand separation and replication). When a double strand contains a suffi-ciently long sequence, and the gaps are filled via complementary pairing, the double strand (or ”parent”) can dissociate into two single strands (or ”offspring”) that re-enter the soup and can participate in subsequent elongation and complementary association. In this way, strand separation implements reproduction: one double strand parent yields two single-stranded progeny (Fig. 13C). 19 Figure 13: DNA norms used in our implementation. 

5.3.2 Experimental conditions 

Before introducing additional layers of organization, we need to first quantitatively evaluate whether the DNA-norm mechanisms measurably increase recurrent sequence motifs in a well-mixed (spaceless) setting. We compare two mechanisms: 1. Condition A (elongation-only; baseline). Only end-extension is enabled. In particular, we disable complementary association and overlap-mediated completion. 2. Condition B (full DNA norms: elongation + complementary association + split). Elon-gation, complementary association with overlap-mediated merging, and splitting are all enabled. Each condition is simulated for N = 50 independent seeds over 400 cycles with mutation rate μ = 10 −4 per nucleotide per cycle. 20 5.3.3 Spatial (CA) embedding of the DNA-norm conditions 

To test whether the same norms produce spatial structure when interactions are local, we embedded Conditions A and B in a 1D CA. The CA consists of N = 512 discrete sites ar-ranged with periodic boundary conditions (i.e., a ring/1D torus where site 0 and site N − 1

are neighbors) and is evolved for T = 512 cycles. Each cell holds at most one DNA frag-ment, which may be a single strand, partially or fully paired double strand. Interactions -elongation, complementary association, and splitting - are restricted to immediate neigh-bors. Each cell carries a nucleotide ”budget” that diffuses to neighbors and is depleted by growth, so that resources become spatially patchy over time. For each condition and motif lengths k ∈ { 4, 6, 8} we constructed spacetime diagrams in which each cell is coloured by the identity of its dominant k-mer at every cycle (Fig. 19). 

# 6 Results 

# 6.1 Barricelli System Analysis 

As mentioned, Barricelli’s work lacked a rigorous analysis of the dynamics in the numerical simulations he presents. Many simple metrics could be used to quantify the behavior of the system. For example, one could track population dynamics by counting organisms and collisions over time (as shown in Figure 14, or their rate of change (i.e., tracking births and deaths). Metrics that track stable numerical sequences would be especially valuable for reasoning about Barricelli’s concept of symbioorganisms, though these were not investi-gated during the workshop. 21 Figure 14: Simple metrics computed for sparse and dense initial conditions over 256 timesteps. The experiments use periodic boundary conditions and 0 norm. Top row: 

Spatiotemporal evolution of the 1D world. Middle row: Aggregate population dynamics showing total replication candidates and living (non-zero) cells over time. Dense initial con-ditions exhibit rapid population collapse following regrowth, while sparse conditions show gradual population growth as organisms spread into empty space. Bottom row: Log-scale distribution of cell values over time, revealing which (numerical values) dominate. Under 0

norm, organisms attempting to replicate into occupied cells mutually annihilate, creating strong selection pressure favouring spatial strategies that minimise conflict. 22 6.1.1 Information-theoretic Metrics 

Following work carried out on elementary cellular automata (ECAs), we calculate the indi-vidual 1D state entropy over time and investigate the mutual information between states at all time-steps. This allows us to quantify the changes in information over time, without prior knowledge of the system’s behavior. 

Figure 15: Information metrics for a 1D Barricelli automata over time. The ‘mutual informa-tion‘ is calculated pairwise between all time-steps, and the ‘Shannon entropy‘ is calculated for individual time-steps. In future, we would like to explore the concepts of transfer entropy and locations of active information storage in these CAs, and investigate how these metrics can be efficiently scaled to the 2D cases. 

# 6.2 Robustness of Barricelli’s symbioorganisms 

Barricelli observed that discovered symbioorganisms exhibit robustness to environmental perturbations and possess the capacity for self-repair, further asserting that ”repairing is 23 more likely to succeed the greater the number of symbioorganisms cooperating” (Barri-celli, 1962). Here, we briefly outline a proposed experiment through which these properties may be investigated more systematically. One approach would be to initialise the environ-ment with a symbioorganism and subsequently introduce an additional single numerical value that, as the system evolves, inevitably collides with the symbioorganism. The survival rate of the symbioorganism can then be quantified across a range of conditions (e.g., by varying the introduced numerical values and their initial distances from the symbioorgan-ism) yielding a measure of its robustness (see Figure 16). A complementary line of inquiry would be to examine the symbioorganism’s resilience when stochastic noise is introduced into the step function, for example by introducing stochasticity to the norms. 

Figure 16: A visualization of how one might study the robustness of Barricelli’s symbioor-ganisms. The grids are initialised with the symbioorganism in the centre. A single addi-tional cell is initialised with a non-zero number that eventually collides with the symbioor-ganism. 

# 6.3 2D Cellular Automata Analysis 

A qualitative analysis of some examples in the 2D setup show interesting ongoing dynamics and waves propagation. 24 6.4 Boolean CA symbiogenesis 

What is the simplest substrate where symbiogenesis effects can be shown? We attempt at experimenting with a 1D Boolean CA where update rules (such as rule 110) would be gated by a symbiogenetic norm (for example whether in the larger neighborhood , that is 2 cells on the left and on the right, for a total of 5 cells including the cell itself - at least a certain number of cells should be active). In case the symbiogenetic norm does not activate the update rule, a decay (mutation) operator is applied where active cells become inactive. Figure 17 shows an execution of a gated 110 rule, where dots reporesent decay mutations. On the right, a zoomed representation of a branch where a persistent pattern (a Boolean symbioorganism?) duplicates. 

Figure 17: An example Boolean symbiogenesis. Left: from random initial state; Right: detailed view. 

# 6.5 Preliminary DNA-norm expansion of Barricelli’s symbiogenesis program 

We compared a baseline elongation-only condition (Condition A) to a DNA-norm condition (Condition B) that additionally permits complementary association with overlap-mediated 25 merging and reproduction by splitting. Our goal is to quantify when the population contains enough repeated motifs of length 

k that repetition is no longer a rare accident of sampling. We operationalize this using a repetition threshold τ . At each cycle t, we collect all contiguous substrings of length k

(” k-mers”) from all strands in the soup. This produces a multiset of k-mer windows (sliding windows along each strand). From these windows we compute the repeated-window frac-tion Rk(t) : the fraction of windows whose k-mer occurs at least twice in the population in that cycle. If Wk(t) is the total number of extracted windows and Sk(t) is the number of windows that occur exactly once, then: 

Rk(t) = Wk(t) − Sk(t)

Wk(t) . (2) To compare independent runs, we convert Rk(t) in a binary criterion: 

Ek(t) = ⊮[Rk(t) ≥ τ ] . (3) The plotted curve (Fig. 18) is then: 

P (k, t ) = 1

N

> N

∑

> i=1

E(i) 

> k

(t), (4) the fraction of simulation runs (out of N seeds) that satisfy the repetition criterion at cycle t.We use τ = 0 .10 and report 95% Wilson confidence intervals for the estimated proportion. 

6.5.1 Complementary association increases the prevalence of repeated longer mo-tifs 

For short motifs ( k = 2 –4) (Fig. 18), the repetition criterion is met rapidly in both conditions: most runs quickly reach a state where at least 10% of k-mer windows are repeats. For 26 longer motifs (Fig. 18), the conditions diverge. Under Condition B (full DNA norms), many runs satisfy the same criterion for k = 6 –8 within the simulated time window, whereas under Condition A (elongation-only) runs rarely reach the threshold for these longer lengths. A natural interpretation is that complementary association (including overlap-mediated merging) facilitates the formation of longer duplex-like regions, which can then split to yield two single-stranded offspring. This increases the reuse and duplication of longer contiguous sequence segments and therefore increases the fraction of k-mer windows occupied by repeated motifs at larger k.

Figure 18: Motif repetition across runs. For each cycle t and motif length k, we measure the fraction Rk(t) of length-k windows that correspond to motifs observed more than once in the population. A run is counted as positive if Rk(t) ≥ τ (here τ = 0 .10 ). Curves show 

P (k, t ), the fraction of N = 50 independent runs meeting this criterion, comparing Con-dition A (elongation-only; green) and Condition B (full DNA norms; blue). Shaded regions indicate 95% Wilson confidence intervals. 27 6.5.2 Spatial organization and local sequence heterogeneity 

In Condition A, the CA does not develop persistent replication or spatial structure (Fig. 19A– C). Dominant k-mers appear as thin, short-lived streaks. These motifs do not spread to neighboring sites, and the signal weakens as k increases (Fig. 19B–C). In this regime, elon-gation can create sequence material, but without complementary association it does not reliably assemble longer strands that can reproduce. By contrast, when complementary as-sociation (including overlap-mediated merging) and splitting are enabled (Condition B), the CA exhibits clear spatial structure (Fig. 19D–F). Neighboring fragments can anneal through complementary overlaps, forming longer double strands; once sufficiently complete, these duplexes split and place offspring into adjacent cells. Repeating this local cycle produces laterally propagating offspring. Domains emerge for short motifs ( k = 4 ) and remain de-tectable for longer motifs ( k = 6 and even k = 8 ), indicating that long contiguous sequence can be maintained and inherited under strictly local interactions. A key qualitative outcome of Condition B is the degree of heterogeneity. Even with only four nucleotide types and a minimal set of DNA-norm operators, multiple distinct motif identities coexist across the lattice (colors/legends in Fig. 19D–F). Different domains are dominated by different k-mers, and these domains nucleate, expand, and interact. Thus, the full DNA-norm generates heritable spatial structure, and sustains a diverse, spatially mixed population of sequence lineages from a minimal alphabet and minimal local rules. 28 Figure 19: Spatial signature of DNA-norms in a 1D cellular automaton. Spacetime diagrams (space on x, cycle on y) show the dominant k-mer identity per cell at each cycle for elongation-only (Condition A; panels A–C) and full DNA-norms with complementary association/overlap-mediated merging and splitting (Condition B; panels D–F). Columns correspond to motif length k ∈ { 4, 6, 8}. Colors indicate the most frequent k-mers (legend in each panel); gray denotes no assignment to the displayed top set. Under Condition A, dominance appears primarily as sparse, short-lived streaks that rarely spread, becoming increasingly rare with larger k. Under Condition B, dominant motifs form contiguous cone-shaped domains that expand from nucleation sites and persist over many cycles, remaining detectable even at k = 8 .

6.5.3 Future expansion 

Our minimal implementation isolates the contribution of the DNA-norms to motif reuse and spatial lineage formation. Several natural extensions would move it closer to Barri-celli’s broader program of open-ended symbiogenesis. A first step is to introduce explicit 29 sequence-dependent operational structures (e.g., binding sites, catalysts) that act back on the environment, for instance by modulating local resource availability. This would al-low genomes to influence replication indirectly through functional components. A second extension would be to assign to the DNA system a genetic language so that sequences would encode rules for assembling multi-part structures, or for recruiting and arranging components into higher-order complexes, making symbiotic integration a mechanism for constructing composite organisms. Third, richer physical constraints could replace the current schematic implementation of stability and completion with explicit energy bud-gets and kinetic costs. Fourth, it would be interesting to include explicit recombination mechanisms such as strand breakage and ligation, multi-template complexes, or template switching during completion. Finally, it is natural to ask whether parts of the machinery implementing the DNA-norms could themselves be influenced by sequence context, rais-ing the broader question of co-adaptation between genomes and their interpreter; related perspectives are discussed in Section 7.3. Moving from DNA-like pairing to an explicit RNA regime would likewise connect the present norms to the computational perspective in Section 7.5. 

# 7 Discussion and Implications 

# 7.1 Related Substrates 

Ideal substrates to test symbiogenesis are Neural Networks and Neural Cellular Automata (NCAs) (Hartl, Levin, & Pio-Lopez, 2026; Mordvintsev et al., 2020), but also other collective systems, and different languages as BFF (Agüera y Arcas et al., 2024). 30 7.2 Implications for AI and Alife 

• Limitations of SOS search algorithms. Many existing “symbiotic” optimization approaches (e.g., Symbiotic Organism Search) treat symbiosis as a heuristic for co-operative optimization rather than as an emergent mechanism that reorganizes the reproductive unit of evolving systems. • Symbiotic evolutionary algorithms. Further research is needed on evolutionary algorithms where symbiotic associations between genomes or programs can emerge dynamically and form new composite individuals. • Evolvability and collective intelligence. Symbiogenesis may increase evolvabil-ity by enabling systems to combine independently evolved functional components into cooperative collectives, thereby driving evolutionary innovation (Kauffman, 1993; Wagner, 2011). This process is notably akin to collective intelligences. • Open endedness. Symbiogenesis may promote evolvability by enabling systematic abstraction of complex systems across scales, into ever higher-order units of orga-nization. • Connections to computation. The true power of symbiogenetic might originate from compositional principles in theoretical computer science, such as combinatory logic and lambda calculus (Akhlaghpour, 2022). 

# 7.3 Co-Evolving Code and Interpreter: A Missing Link for Environ-mental Feedback? 

The standard view of genetics holds that genes encode phenotypical traits of organisms, and that selection acts on those traits. Reproduction through a genetic bottleneck in-troduces variation via crossover and mutation, allowing beneficial genes to persist while unfavourable ones perish, thereby driving adaptation and evolution through random mu-31 tation and selection. A more accurate picture, however, is that genes primarily encode protein sequences (among other functional elements). Once transcribed, proteins become nano-machines that operate in the context of their cellular environment and continuously reconfigure their host system Levin, 2023. Biology is working with messy hardware and software. To achieve stable and canalizing out-comes during organism development and maintenance across scales, the puzzle pieces of biological organization–from cells, tissue, organoids, towards organisms, and possible beyond–must actively navigate their own problem spaces (Fields & Levin, 2020, 2022). This implies the presence of an intermediate computational layer between the genetic en-coding of an organism and its anatomical form and function, as discussed for instance in the framework of multiscsale competency architectures (Levin, 2023). Evolution operates on an agential material: the components of living systems can deal with novel situations on the fly (as illustrated by galls, Xenobots, or regenerative experiments), which can in turn accelerate evolvability and facilitate transfer learning across evolutionary timescales (Hartl et al., 2024). In this perspective, evolution does not merely search for the most fitted or-ganisms, but brings forth problem-solving entities capable of integrating into collectives of collectives across scales of biological organization. If we adopt the view of biology as a multiscale competency architecture–or, in modern terminology, a form of collective intelligence–then the genomic bottleneck, together with gene regulatory and developmen-tal mechanisms, can be understood as a functional problem-solving unit, describable as a generative model operating within its multicellular environment (Hartl & Levin, 2025; Mitchell & Cheney, 2025). 

Why is this relevant in the context of symbiogenetic (computational) systems? 

An evolving genetic code alone–even a rule-set for replication is present–is only half of the story. Genetic sequences are interpreted in the context of the cellular host: coding blocks are transcribed into functional units, such as proteins, that interact with their biochemical 32 environment. The ribosome acts as a molecular decoder, yet the broader cellular context– including cytoplasmic conditions, regulatory networks, interactions with other cells, and environmental signals and developmental stages–effectively determines how the genetic code is interpreted at any given moment. This interpretation layer displays active problem-solving properties. For example, regenerative experiments with planarian flatworms placed in Barium solution show that cells can identify and express the correct subset of genes– among tens of thousands–to rebuild a head that remains stable under these novel condi-tions (Durant et al., 2017). This is remarkable since Barium has with large certainty never been a factor in their evolutionary history: this adaptation to barium resistance happens within the same specimen. In this sense, gene regulation, readout, and replication are not passive processes but active, context-dependent computations. Recent work in developmental biology, artificial life, and machine learning increasingly points toward similar architectural principles. In biological systems, the genome does not function as a static blueprint but rather as a compact encoding that unfolds through distributed regulatory dynamics across cells and tissues (Hartl & Levin, 2025; Mitchell & Cheney, 2025): Cellular collectives interpret and reconfigure gene expression patterns through local signaling, feedback, and environmental interactions, effectively implement-ing a distributed developmental computation. Related ideas have also emerged in artificial systems, where adaptive models construct internal representations or embedding spaces that are dynamically remapped as new information becomes available (Hartl, Pio-Lopez, et al., 2026). In both cases, interpretation is not merely the decoding of instructions but an active process that maps encoded information into functional behavior under changing environmental conditions and co-evolving internal dynamics. From this perspective, not only the genetic code evolves, but also the engine that inter-prets it–potentially across multiple spatial- and timescales spanning evolution, develop-ment, and learning. Changes in this interpreter modify not only the content written on the 33 tape, but also the language by which that tape is read. In most artificial life and computa-tional evolution systems, however, the interpreter is fixed. For instance, the BFF replicator experiments in computational life (Agüera y Arcas et al., 2024) assume a predefined pro-gramming language and compiler, while Barricelli’s experiments rely on fixed interaction norms. Many physical substrates–such as chemical reaction networks–naturally provide rule sets that can implement computational processes. Yet the emergence of life-like organization appears to depend less on the mere existence of such rules and more on the particular combinations that allow them to interact productively. In other words, the right combination makes the soup. This suggests that the interpreter itself may need to co-evolve with the evolving system: life achieves robust functionality using unreliable hard-ware and software precisely because the genomic code and its interpreter jointly evolve toward mutually beneficial robustness and adaptability in the face of novelty. 

# 7.4 From environmental constraints to cooperation through combi-natorial functional niching 

Our biosphere exists in a resource-constrained environment, which naturally leads to com-petition between organisms. At the same time, organisms must persist within the condi-tions imposed by their environment. One promising formalization of this requirement is given by the free energy principle and active inference frameworks, in which persistence corresponds to minimizing surprise or prediction error with respect to environmental states (Friston, 2010; Friston et al., 2017). In practice, this can be achieved in two complementary ways: organisms can act to modify their environment so that it becomes more predictable, or they can update internal belief states about the environment through learning Pezzulo and Levin, 2016. Survival therefore requires not only learning how to act, but also learning the relevant modalities of the surrounding environment. Importantly, organisms do not merely react to their environment; they can also utilize and 34 reshape parts of it for their own benefit. Their behavior is therefore conditional on envi-ronmental structure and constraints (Fields & Levin, 2020, 2022; Hartl, Pio-Lopez, et al., 2026). Different environmental constraints may reward different sets of capabilities, lead-ing to diverse evolutionary strategies and skill sets. A natural question then arises: what happens when organisms with different capabilities coexist or compete within the same environment? Game-theoretic results suggest that, over long time horizons, collabora-tive strategies can outperform purely adversarial ones, as illustrated by experiments on the iterative prisoner’s dilemma (Axelrod, 1981). In this context, symbiotic interactions can become an advantageous strategy, allowing collective agents to distribute labor and specialize in complementary functions. Computational studies have suggested that such symbiotic composition can increase evolvability by enabling systems to combine indepen-dently evolved functional modules into mutually beneficial higher-order structures (R. A. Watson & Pollack, 2001, 2003). Individuality is dynamic: symbiotic associations can ultimately lead to evolutionary tran-sitions in individuality, where previously independent entities merge into novel individuals that can no longer exist independently. Such higher-order organizational units may capital-ize on the functional resources of their constituent parts (Fields & Levin, 2020, 2022; Hartl, Pio-Lopez, et al., 2026) and utilize them “on demand” in a combinatorial manner. We refer to this principle as “ combinatorial functional niching ”: the ability of a collective system to combine and integrate orthogonally acquired functionalities through specialization and cooperation to achieve new functional capabilities (R. A. Watson & Pollack, 2001, 2003). In principle, this mechanism allows collaborative hierarchical collectives–or multiscale com-petency architectures–to access a combinatorially expanding space of capabilities without requiring every component to independently evolve all necessary functions. This perspective is particularly intriguing at the genetic and regulatory level. Gene regula-tory networks (GRNs) can address genes flexibly and context-dependently, enabling combi-35 nations of gene products that support different physiological or developmental outcomes. Following symbiogenetic events, such regulatory mechanisms may allow the integrated system to reason over newly combined genetic repertoires and deploy them in novel con-texts. In this sense, symbiogenesis may not only increase genetic diversity but also expand the functional space that a system can explore, potentially providing a probabilistic advan-tage for persistence within a complex and highly entropic environment. Combinatorial functional niching might be tested in environments that require multiple difficult-to-learn functions. Different organisms could specialize in different tasks and co-operate as a collective through symbiotic interactions. Symbiogenetic events may then allow these capabilities to be combined, enabling higher-level control structuress to co-ordinate integrated functionality. In such a setting, an interpreter that can access and orchestrate the functional repertoire of multiple symbionts could merge their capabilities to gain a combinatorial advantage. Several related questions arise from this perspective: • We know that niche construction exists → Is symbiogenesis a promoter of niching? • Is symbiogenesis an ingredient for kickstarting life, vs. promoting open-endedness? • Are symbiosis and symbiogenesis the same thing, but represent different stages of a collaborative integration process? • Considering higher levels of organization beyond genes, combinatorial functional niching may provide an organizing principle for evolutionary transitions and shifts in the reproductive unit. It raises the possibility that reproductive units can actively reorganize to explore niches more efficiently. • Considering cultural evolution, “from genes to memes”: How do minds, companies, or societies ”reproduce”? Is learning/acquiring new memories a symbiogenetic event for our minds (Hartl & Levin, 2025; Levin, 2024)? Do societies age (Pio-Lopez et al., 36 2025)? This suggests that symbiogenesis may not only generate new organisms, but may also ex-pand the functional niche space accessible to evolving systems across scales more gener-ally. We close this section with a final thought: Does the interpreter exist independently of the genome, or is it itself another symbiogenetic system that keeps this dual engine of life running (c.f. the relationship between genomes, and proteins, cytoplasmic machinery)? 

# 7.5 RNA: A Physical Turing-Complete Language 

Recent work has suggested that RNA can act as a computational substrate capable of im-plementing a language with the same expressive power as a universal Turing machine (Akhlagh-pour, 2022). In this work, the authors relate and define combinatory logic operators (such as the classical B, C, K, and W combinators) with biochemical mechanisms including base pairing, strand displacement, and splicing-like transformations of RNA strands. This frame-work positions RNA molecules and their interactions as a physical system capable of ex-ecuting combinatory programs. Structurally, such computations are realized through the formation of loops, junctions, and matching addresses along RNA strands, effectively cre-ating a dynamically reconfigurable molecular program tape; see also Sections 5.3 and 6.5. This observation raises interesting questions for artificial life systems inspired by early computational evolution experiments. For example, Barricelli’s automata operate through collision-based interaction norms on a one-dimensional lattice. These norms determine how numerical sequences replicate and interact when they encounter one another. While these rules are capable of generating self-reproducing structures and symbiogenetic events, it remains unclear–in contrast to Turing-complete languages such as BFF (Agüera y Arcas et al., 2024)–whether the underlying rule set is computationally universal. In particular, Barricelli’s system does not appear to naturally support the formation of persistent ad-dressing mechanisms or recursive control structures analogous to those found in universal 37 computational systems. This leads to a natural question: what minimal rules or interaction norms would be re-quired for a one-dimensional automaton to become computationally universal in an RNA-like sense? In particular, would the emergence of universal computation require the spon-taneous formation of addressing mechanisms, loops, or other compositional structures that resemble symbiotic integration between interacting programs? From a biological perspective, this possibility is intriguing. RNA and DNA exist within a thermodynamic environment composed of large combinatorial spaces of interacting molecules. Surviving in such an environment may require systems to reason over combina-tions of molecular interactions and gene expression patterns. In this sense, the regulatory and interpretive machinery of living systems may implicitly implement computations over combinatorial spaces of molecular states. If so, the molecular languages of life may natu-rally approximate computational systems capable of universal computation, implemented directly within biochemical substrates. Understanding which minimal interaction rules allow such computational capacities to emerge could therefore help bridge the gap between early artificial life models, such as Barricelli’s symbioorganisms, and modern views of biological computation. 

# 7.6 Ideas for future work 

• Task environments for symbioorganisms. Barricelli originally introduced struc-tured environments by allowing symbioorganisms to play the game Tac Tix. Extend-ing this idea, one could design environments containing multiple tasks or “games”. Different organisms could specialize in different tasks, while symbiotic associations allow cooperative strategies to emerge. Symbiogenetic events could then integrate these specialized capabilities into higher-level organisms that can exploit multiple strategies simultaneously. 38 • Evolving interpreters. A central conceptual question concerns the nature of the interpreter. In most artificial life systems, the rules governing interactions are fixed and effectively act as the “laws of the universe”. Biological systems, however, rely on complex interpretive machinery that translates genomic information into functional behavior. In this context, even the existence of a stable rule-set is a non-trivial presumption: both the code and its interpreter must ultimately be implemented by physical processes. The laws of physics do not inherently perform computation, yet living systems have evolved ways to utilize physical states/substrates to encode and process information (Wolpert & Korbel, 2026). This raises intriguing questions: do interpreters themselves need to evolve? Could symbioorganisms influence the mechanisms that interpret their genomes, thereby increasing their own viability or evolvability? • computational testbed One possible computational testbed for these ideas could involve evolutionary experiments that explicitly decouple genomic code from its in-terpreter. For instance, the genome could be represented as a sequence of symbols, while a learned attention mechanism (e.g., a QKV-attention head) acts as the inter-preter that reads and transforms this sequence. In such a setting, genes or blocks of genes could attend to arbitrary positions in the sequence, enabling flexible re-combination and functional composition, analogous to the combinatorial functional niching discussed above. An open question is how the parameters of the interpreter (e.g., the attention mechanism) could co-evolve with the genome itself, possibly via indirect or developmental encodings. • Emergent biological functionality. Can sensing mechanisms emerge in such sys-tems? Can membranes or compartmentalization arise as a consequence of evolu-tionary pressures? More generally, can interpreters themselves emerge, potentially giving rise to self-coding or self-modifying languages? 39 • Computational universality. Are any of Barricelli’s interaction norms computation-ally universal? More generally, what minimal rule sets or interaction norms are suffi-cient to support universal computation in evolutionary automata? Investigating such questions could clarify the relationship between replication dynamics, symbiogene-sis, and the emergence of computationally expressive systems. • Connections to mathematics and theoretical computer science. Are there ana-logues of replicators, loops, or symbiogenetic integration in formal systems such as lambda calculus, combinatory logic, or proof systems? Exploring such connections may help reveal deeper structural principles underlying replication and composition in computational systems. 

# 8 Conclusion 

It’s complicated!! But fun :) 

This report explored symbiogenesis from three complementary perspectives. First, we revisited Barricelli’s numerical symbioorganisms and implemented several computational substrates inspired by his framework, including 1D and 2D cellular automata as well as a minimal Boolean CA variant to explore the simplest settings in which symbiogenetic dynamics may arise. Second, we introduced minimal DNA-inspired interaction norms to investigate how molecular-like local rules can give rise to replication, sequence reuse, and spatial lineage formation. Third, we discussed broader implications of symbiogen-esis for artificial life and artificial intelligence, including collective intelligence, evolving interpreters, and combinatorial functional organization in computational systems. Note: This report is the result of a 1-week group work at the ALICE 2026 workshop. It is not meant to be a properly written scientific paper, rather a collection of ideas, thoughts, preliminary results, and considerations that emerged during brainstorming and group dis-40 cussions. Revisiting Barricelli’s work has provided many open directions for future work, many of which are discussed (altough often in bullet-point lists) in this document. We call the ALife community to revise and expand of Barricelli’s pioneering ideas and we hope this report motivates other colleagues to investigate further. If ideas in this report are pursued further or expanded, we kindly ask to cite this report. 

# Data and code policy 

All code for the 1D/2D Barricelli systems is available here 

# Acknowledgments 

We would like to thank the ALICE 2026 organizers. Additionally, special thanks to Tim Tay-lor for copies of the original manuscripts from Barricelli, Luca Manzoni for useful material from a keynote talk at SSCI, and Kai Olav Ellefsen for scanned copies of manuscripts from the Oslo University library. 

# References 

Agüera y Arcas, B. (2025, September). What is intelligence? MIT Press. Agüera y Arcas, B., Alakuijala, J., Evans, J., Laurie, B., Mordvintsev, A., Niklasson, E., Ran-dazzo, E., & Versari, L. (2024). Computational life: How well-formed, self-replicating programs emerge from simple interaction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.19108 .Akhlaghpour, H. (2022). An rna-based theory of natural universal computation. Journal of Theoretical Biology , 537 , 110984. Axelrod, R. (1981). The emergence of cooperation among egoists. American Political Sci-ence Review , 75 (2), 306–318. https://doi.org/10.2307/1961366 41 Barricelli, N. A., et al. (1954). Esempi numerici di processi di evoluzione. Methodos , 6(21-22), 45–68. Barricelli, N. A. (1957). Symbiogenetic evolution processes realized by artificial methods .Barricelli, N. A. (1962). Numerical testing of evolution theories: Part i theoretical introduc-tion and basic tests. Acta Biotheoretica , 16 (1-2), 69–98. Barricelli, N. A. (1963). Numerical testing of evolution theories: Part ii preliminary tests of performance. symbiogenesis and terrestrial life. Acta Biotheoretica , 16 (3-4), 99– 126. Bull, L., & Fogarty, T. C. (1995). Artificial symbiogenesis. Artificial Life , 2(3), 269–292. Chan, B. W.-C. (2019). Lenia: Biology of artificial life. Complex Systems , 28 (3), 251–286. https://doi.org/10.25088/ComplexSystems.28.3.251 Daida, J. M., Grasso, C. S., Stanhope, S. A., & Ross, S. J. (1996). Symbionticism and complex adaptive systems i: Implications of having symbiosis occur in nature. Evolutionary Programming , 177–186. Doucette, J. A., McIntyre, A. R., Lichodzijewski, P., & Heywood, M. I. (2012). Symbiotic coevo-lutionary genetic programming: A benchmarking study under large attribute spaces. 

Genetic Programming and Evolvable Machines , 13 (1), 71–101. Durant, F., Morokuma, J., Fields, C., Williams, K., Adams, D. S., & Levin, M. (2017). Long-term, stochastic editing of regenerative anatomy via targeting endogenous bioelectric gradients. Biophysical journal , 112 (10), 2231–2243. Egbert, M., Hanczyc, M. M., Harvey, I., Virgo, N., Parke, E. C., Froese, T., Sayama, H., Penn, A. S., & Bartlett, S. (2023). Behaviour and the origin of organisms. Origins of Life and Evolution of Biospheres , 53 (1), 87–112. Fields, C., & Levin, M. (2020). Scale￿free biology: Integrating evolutionary and develop-mental thinking. BioEssays , 42 (8). https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.201900228 Fields, C., & Levin, M. (2022). Competency in navigating arbitrary spaces as an invariant for analyzing cognition in diverse embodiments. Entropy , 24 (6), 819. 42 Fogel, D. (2006). Nils barricelli - artificial life, coevolution, self-adaptation. IEEE Compu-tational Intelligence Magazine , 1(1), 41–45. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MCI . 2006 . 1597062 Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: A unified brain theory? Nature Reviews Neu-roscience , 11 (2), 127–138. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2787 Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., & Pezzulo, G. (2017). Active inference: A process theory. Neural Computation , 29 (1), 1–49. https://doi.org/10.1162/neco_a_ 00912 Gilbert, S. F., Sapp, J., & Tauber, A. I. (2012). A symbiotic view of life: We have never been individuals. The Quarterly review of biology , 87 (4), 325–341. Godfrey-Smith, P. (2015). Individuality and life cycles. Individuals across the Sciences , 85. Gómez, A., & Nichols, E. (2013). Neglected wild life: Parasitic biodiversity as a conservation target. International Journal for Parasitology: Parasites and Wildlife , 2, 222–227. Halavati, R., & Shouraki, S. B. (2009). Symbiotic evolutionary algorithm, a remedy for link-age problem. International Journal of Computational Intelligence and Applications ,

8(03), 237–252. Halavati, R., Shouraki, S. B., Heravi, M. J., & Jashmi, B. J. (2007). A general purpose opti-mization approach. 2007 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation , 4538–4545. Hartl, B., & Levin, M. (2025). What does evolution make? learning in living lineages and machines. Trends in Genetics , 41 (6), 480–496. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.tig.2025.04.002 Hartl, B., Levin, M., & Pio-Lopez, L. (2026). Neural cellular automata: Applications to biology and beyond classical ai. Physics of Life Reviews , 56 , 94–108. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.plrev.2025.11.010 Hartl, B., Pio-Lopez, L., Fields, C., & Levin, M. (2026). Remapping and navigation of an embedding space via error minimization: A fundamental organizational principle of cognition in natural and artificial systems. https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.14096 43 Hartl, B., Risi, S., & Levin, M. (2024). Evolutionary implications of self-assembling cybernetic materials with collective problem-solving intelligence at multiple scales. Entropy ,

26 (7). https://doi.org/10.3390/e26070532 Hatcher, M. J., Dick, J. T., & Dunn, A. M. (2012). Diverse effects of parasites in ecosystems: Linking interdependent processes. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment , 10 (4), 186–194. Heywood, M. I., & Lichodzijewski, P. (2010). Symbiogenesis as a mechanism for building complex adaptive systems: A review. European Conference on the Applications of Evolutionary Computation , 51–60. Holland, J. H. (1992). Adaptation in natural and artificial systems . MIT press. Hristovski, R., & Balagué, N. (2020). Theory of cooperative-competitive intelligence: Prin-ciples, research directions, and applications. Frontiers in psychology , 11 , 2220. Hudson, P. J., Dobson, A. P., & Lafferty, K. D. (2006). Is a healthy ecosystem one that is rich in parasites? Trends in ecology & evolution , 21 (7), 381–385. Kauffman, S. A. (1993, June). The origins of order . Oxford University Press. Kouvaris, K., Clune, J., Kounios, L., Brede, M., & Watson, R. A. (2017). How evolution learns to generalise: Using the principles of learning theory to understand the evolution of developmental organisation. PLoS computational biology , 13 (4), e1005358. Langton, C. G. (1984). Self-reproduction in cellular automata. Physica D: Nonlinear Phe-nomena , 10 (1-2), 135–144. Levin, M. (2019). The computational boundary of a “self”: Developmental bioelectricity drives multicellularity and scale-free cognition. Frontiers in Psychology , 10 . https: //doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02688 Levin, M. (2022). Technological Approach to Mind Everywhere: An Experimentally-Grounded Framework for Understanding Diverse Bodies and Minds. Frontiers in Systems Neu-roscience , 16 , 768201. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnsys.2022.768201 44 Levin, M. (2023). Darwin’s agential materials: Evolutionary implications of multiscale com-petency in developmental biology. Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences , 80 (6), 142. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-023-04790-z Levin, M. (2024). Self-improvising memory: A perspective on memories as agential, dynam-ically reinterpreting cognitive glue. Entropy , 26 (6), 481. https://doi.org/10.3390/ e26060481 Levin, M., & Watson, R. (2026). Machines all the way up and cognition all the way down: Up-dating the machine metaphor in biology. Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology ,

177–178 , 103668. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semcdb.2026.103668 Margulis, L. (1970). Origin of eukaryotic cells . Yale University Press. Margulis, L. (1971). Symbiosis and evolution. Scientific American , 225 (2), 48–61. Margulis, L. (1981). Symbiosis in cell evolution: Life and its environment on the early earth. 

Symbiosis in cell evolution: Life and its environment on the early earth by Margulis ,44578. McMillen, P., & Levin, M. (2024). Collective intelligence: A unifying concept for integrating biology across scales and substrates. Communications Biology , 7(1). https : / / doi . org/10.1038/s42003-024-06037-4 Mitchell, K. J., & Cheney, N. (2025). The genomic code: The genome instantiates a gener-ative model of the organism. Trends in Genetics , 41 (6), 462–479. https://doi.org/ https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tig.2025.01.008 Mordvintsev, A., Randazzo, E., Niklasson, E., & Levin, M. (2020). Growing neural cellular automata. Distill , 5(2). https://doi.org/10.23915/distill.00023 Mougi, A. (2016). The roles of amensalistic and commensalistic interactions in large eco-logical network stability. Scientific Reports , 6(1), 29929. Okasha, S. (2006). Evolution and the levels of selection . Clarendon Press. Pargellis, A. N. (1996). The evolution of self-replicating computer organisms. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena , 98 (1), 111–127. 45 Pezzulo, G., & Levin, M. (2016). Top-down models in biology: Explanation and control of complex living systems above the molecular level. Journal of The Royal Society In-terface , 13 (124), 20160555. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2016.0555 Pio-Lopez, L., Bischof, J., LaPalme, J. V., & Levin, M. (2023). The scaling of goals from cellu-lar to anatomical homeostasis: An evolutionary simulation, experiment and analysis. 

Interface Focus , 13 (3), 20220072. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsfs.2022.0072 Pio-Lopez, L., Hartl, B., & Levin, M. (2025). Aging as a loss of goal-directedness: An evolu-tionary simulation and analysis unifying regeneration with anatomical rejuvenation. 

Advanced Science , 12 (46), e09872. Shreesha, L., Pigozzi, F., Goldstein, A., & Levin, M. (2025). Extending iterated, spatialized prisoner’s dilemma to understand multicellularity: Game theory with self-scaling players. IEEE Transactions on Molecular, Biological, and Multi-Scale Communica-tions , 11 (2), 135–151. https://doi.org/10.1109/TMBMC.2025.3562358 Smith, J. M., & Szathmary, E. (1997). The major transitions in evolution . Oxford University Press. Szathmáry, E., & Smith, J. M. (1995). The major evolutionary transitions. Nature , 374 (6519), 227–232. Taylor, T., & Dorin, A. (2020). Rise of the self-replicators: Early visions of machines, ai and robots that can reproduce and evolve . Springer Nature. Von Neumann, J., & Burks, A. W. (1966). Theory of self-reproducing automata . University of Illinois press. Wagner, A. (2011, July). The origins of evolutionary innovations . Oxford University Press. Watson, R., & Levin, M. (2023). The collective intelligence of evolution and development. 

Collective Intelligence , 2(2), 26339137231168355. Watson, R. A., Levin, M., & Buckley, C. L. (2022). Design for an individual: Connectionist approaches to the evolutionary transitions in individuality. Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution , 10 , 823588. 46 Watson, R. A., Mills, R., Buckley, C., Kouvaris, K., Jackson, A., Powers, S. T., Cox, C., Tudge, S., Davies, A., Kounios, L., et al. (2016). Evolutionary connectionism: Algorithmic prin-ciples underlying the evolution of biological organisation in evo-devo, evo-eco and evolutionary transitions. Evolutionary biology , 43 (4), 553–581. Watson, R. A., & Pollack, J. B. (2001). Symbiotic composition and evolvability. European Conference on Artificial Life , 480–490. Watson, R. A., & Pollack, J. B. (2003). A computational model of symbiotic composition in evolutionary transitions. Biosystems , 69 (2-3), 187–209. Watson, R. A., & Szathmáry, E. (2016). How can evolution learn? Trends in ecology & evo-lution , 31 (2), 147–157. West, S. A., Fisher, R. M., Gardner, A., & Kiers, E. T. (2015). Major evolutionary transitions in individuality. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 112 (33), 10112– 10119. Wolpert, D. H., & Korbel, J. (2026). What does it mean for a system to compute? Journal of Physics: Complexity , 7(1), 015010. 47