Title: Reconstructing chemical enrichment pathways in disc galaxies: A phylogenetic approach

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.11974v1

Published Time: Wed, 15 Apr 2026 00:10:35 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. aa_origins ©ESO 2026 April 15, 2026 

# Reconstructing chemical enrichment pathways in disc galaxies 

# A phylogenetic approach 

Brian Tapia-Contreras 1, 2, 3†, Patricia B. Tissera 1, 2, 3, Emanuel Sillero 1, 2, 3, Paula Jofré 3, 4, Keaghan Yaxley 5, Xia Hua 6,Robert M. Yates 7, Álvaro Márquez S. 3, 8, Theosamuele Signor 4, 9, Payel Das 10 , Álvaro Rojas-Arriagada 3, 11 , 12 , 13 ,Claudia Aguilera-Gómez 1, 3, Francisco Jara-Ferreira 1, 2, 3, and Robert A. Foley 14  

> 1

Instituto de Astrofísica, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Av. Vicuña Mackenna 4860, Santiago, Chile. 

> †

e-mail: brian.tapia@uc.cl  

> 2

Centro de Astro-ingeniería, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Av. Vicuña Mackenna 4860, Santiago, Chile.  

> 3

Millenium Nucleus ERIS  

> 4

Instituto de Estudios Astrofísicos, Facultad de Ingeniería y Ciencias, Univesidad Diego Portales, Santiago de Chile  

> 5

Macroevolution and Macroecology, Research School of Biology, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 0200, Australia  

> 6

Mathematical Sciences Institute, Australian National University, Canberra ACT 0200 Australia  

> 7

Centre for Astrophysics Research, University of Hertfordshire, Hatfield AL10 9AB, UK  

> 8

Department of Mathematical Engineering, Universidad de Chile  

> 9

Inria Chile Research Center, Av. Apoquindo 2827, piso 12, Las Condes, Santiago, Chile  

> 10

School of Mathematics and Physics, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey, GU2 7XH, UK  

> 11

Departamento de Física, Universidad de Santiago de Chile, Av. Victor Jara 3659, Santiago, Chile  

> 12

Millenium Institute of Astrophysics (MAS), Av. Vicuña Mackenna 4860, 82-0436 Macul, Santiago, Chile  

> 13

Center for Interdisciplinary Research in Astrophysics and Space Exploration (CIRAS), Universidad de Santiago de Chile, Santi-ago, Chile  

> 14

Leverhulme Centre for Human Evolutionary Studies, Department for Anthropology and Archaeology, University of Cambridge, Fitzwilliam Street., Cambridge CB2 1QH, UK Received September 30, 20XX 

ABSTRACT 

Context. Phylogenetic methods, traditionally used in biology to trace the evolutionary relationships among species, are emerging as a powerful framework to reconstruct evolutionary processes in galaxies from chemical information. 

Aims. We apply galactic phylogenetics to study the chemical evolution of stellar populations in distinct regions of a simulated disc galaxy, assessing its capability to unveil assembly histories. 

Methods. We used a high-resolution simulation that follows the chemical enrichment of an isolated disc galaxy, by di ff erent stellar progenitors. We track gas particles as they turn into stars and inherit their parent gas chemical composition. Target particles are selected to store the chemical history of each chemical element considered in the simulation. Two regions were analysed: an inner ring, influenced by early bar-driven inflows, and an outer ring, shaped by spiral arms. We built phylogenetic trees for stellar populations in each region and quantified their structure using the Corrected Colless index, a standard metric of tree balance used in biology. 

Results. The inner ring tree reveals a compact clade of old stars enriched by rapid SNII feedback, followed by a hierarchical sequence with increasing SNIa and AGB contributions. In contrast, the outer ring exhibits more symmetric, caterpillar-like trees with smoother abundance gradients, consistent with more prolonged star formation and e ffi cient local mixing. Chemical enrichment rates corroborate these trends, showing fast early enrichment in the inner ring and gradual, spatially extended enrichment in the outer disc. The structural indices di ff er significantly between the two regions and converge robustly even for modest stellar samples (N SSP = 100). 

Conclusions. Galactic phylogenetics provides a novel and complementary tool to decode the fossil record of galaxies. It captures distinct chemical pathways across galactic environments and o ff ers quantitative metrics for comparing assembly histories purely from chemical abundances. 

Key words. Methods: numerical – Galaxies: abundances - Galaxies: formation 

1. Introduction 

Galaxies are complex systems composed of stars, gas, dust, and dark matter, evolving through cosmic time while interacting with their surroundings. They grow by accreting gas and stars from the intergalactic medium and neighbouring systems, and the physical processes that shape their evolution, such as gas accretion, mergers, stellar feedback, and radial migration, op-erate across a wide range of spatial and temporal scales (e.g. White & Frenk 1991). These processes leave observable im-prints on the properties of galaxies, particularly on the chemical composition of their stellar populations, which serves as a fossil record of their formation histories (Bland-Hawthorn & Freeman 2003). Chemical abundance patterns in stars of di ff erent ages are especially powerful tools to probe galaxy evolution, as they re-flect the integrated action of nucleosynthesis, gas flows, and star formation over time. As baryons, originally in the form of pri-mordial gas (mainly H and He, with traces of D and Li), are con-verted into stars, heavier elements are synthesised and returned 

Article number, page 1  

> arXiv:2604.11974v1 [astro-ph.GA] 13 Apr 2026 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa_origins

to the interstellar medium (ISM) through supernovae and stel-lar winds. The ISM becomes progressively enriched in heavy elements, and new generations of stars inherit this chemical sig-nature. This process, known as astration, creates a sequence of chemical patterns that can be linked to the physical mechanisms driving galaxy evolution (Tinsley 1980). However, disentangling the overlapping e ff ects of di ff erent processes remains a signifi-cant challenge. In this context, chemical evolution models have long served as essential tools to interpret the observed abundance patterns of stars. Detailed analytic and semi-analytic models describing how elements are produced and distributed by Type II (SNII) and Type Ia (SNIa) supernovae, as well as by asymptotic gi-ant branch (AGB) stars, provide key insights into the timescales and effi ciency of star formation in di ff erent galactic envi-ronments (Matteucci & Greggio 1986; Mollá & Ferrini 1995). These models have been compared to the Milky Way (MW) and other galaxies, revealing the connections between chemi-cal signatures and star formation history (Thomas et al. 1998; Nagashima et al. 2005; Calura & Menci 2009; Arrigoni et al. 2010; Pipino & Matteucci 2011; Yates et al. 2013). While analytic and semi-analytic models models remain fundamental, they often lack the spatial and dynamical res-olution needed to fully capture galaxy evolution. Hydrody-namical chemodynamical simulations address this limitation by self-consistently modelling both the gravitational and chemi-cal evolution of galaxies (e.g. Mosconi et al. 2001; Lia et al. 2002). These simulations follow gas dynamics, star forma-tion, and feedback processes over cosmic time, incorpo-rating element production and transport across the galaxy. They have become indispensable for linking observational data across cosmic time and validating theoretical models (Raiteri et al. 1996; Tissera et al. 2012, 2016; Pedrosa & Tissera 2015; Sillero et al. 2017; Yates et al. 2021; Bellardini et al. 2021; Garcia et al. 2023). In particular, the implementation of chemical enrichment in cosmological simulations provides a powerful means to study the interplay between baryonic physics and chemical signatures within the evolving struc-ture of galaxies (e.g. Tissera et al. 2013; Ma et al. 2017; De Rossi et al. 2017; Hemler et al. 2021; Fragkoudi et al. 2020; Jara-Ferreira et al. 2024; Tapia-Contreras et al. 2025; Tau et al. 2025; Gonzalez-Jara et al. 2025). Treating chemical evolution within the context of the non-linear formation and evolution of galaxies provides fundamental insights into how the chemi-cal properties of baryons are linked to specific events in galaxy evolution, such as mergers (e.g. Kewley et al. 2010; Rupke et al. 2010; Perez et al. 2011) or migration (Johnson et al. 2021). Simultaneously, advances in observational astronomy have revolutionised our ability to test these models. Multi-band photo-metric and spectroscopic surveys, together with astrometric data from the Gaia mission, have produced high-precision measure-ments of stellar positions, motions, and chemical abundances for millions of stars in the MW (e.g. Jofré et al. 2017; Queiroz et al. 2023; Recio-Blanco et al. 2023). This wealth of data enables the identification of chemically distinct populations and accreted components (e.g. Helmi 2020), as well as the characterisation of radial gradients, age–metallicity relations, and dynamical sub-structures (Deason & Belokurov 2024, and references therein). As the MOONS, 4-MOST, Vera Rubin Observatory, and later the ELT, begin operations, the volume and quality of such data will keep growing exponentially. The growing complexity of observational datasets calls for new approaches that can reconstruct the history of galaxy evo-lution from the chemical abundances of stellar populations, which preserve the imprint of the ISM from which they formed. A promising framework is provided by phylogenetic methods, originally developed in evolutionary biology to reconstruct the relationships among organisms based on heritable traits (Darwin 1859). A phylogeny is a graph whose branches depict both the pattern of relatedness among species, indicating which species are more closely related, and the evolutionary distance between species, which store information on how much evolutionary change has accrued or how much time has past since the species diverged from a shared a common ancestor. The points on a phylogeny where branches converge are called nodes and repre-sent the last common ancestor of the descending species, which themselves can be collectively referred to as a clade. The node representing the last common ancestor of all the species on the tree is referred to as the root of the tree. The amount of evolu-tionary distance between nodes is captured by the length of the branches separating them. Under the assumption that chemical abundances behave analogously to DNA, which is transmitted through descent with modification from one generation to the next, phylogenetic tools have been already applied to observed stellar populations in the disc of the Milky Way (MW; Jofré et al. 2017; Jackson et al. 2021; Walsen et al. 2024) and to reconstruct the complex evo-lutionary history of Omega Centauri ( ωCen; Jofré et al. 2025). This assumption is based on the fact that new chemical elements are injected into the ISM by the previous stellar generations, modifying the abundances of the gas clouds from which new stars are formed. The new stars inherit its chemical patterns and hence, are used as tracers of chemical evolution. Additionally, de Brito Silva et al. (2024) first tested this ap-proach in numerical simulations, as they o ff er a powerful frame-work for connecting the properties of the trees to specific events in the assembly history of galaxies. de Brito Silva et al. (2024) showed that in an isolated disc galaxy, with neither interac-tions nor external gas infall, the phylogenetic tree is largely fea-tureless, resembling a single sequence or a “caterpillar” 1 tree. In such trees, stellar ages evolve monotonically from the root. Moreover, di ff erent regions within the same galaxy give rise to longer (shorter) trees in environments with higher (lower) star formation rates. When applied to observations in the case of the MW and ωCen, phylogenetic trees displayed distinct clades. Nu-merical simulations provide a crucial framework for linking the chemo-dynamical evolution of galaxies to the structure of their phylogenetic trees, thereby enabling a physically grounded in-terpretation of observed phylogenetic trees. In this paper, we advance the understanding of galactic phy-logenetics using numerical simulations. We apply galactic phy-logenetics to a chemodynamical simulation of an isolated disc galaxy, dubbed the Origins simulation, tailored to study the chemical enrichment of di ff erent galactic regions. We store de-tailed information on the chemical enrichment history by explic-itly tracking the production, transport, and final fate of individual chemical elements synthesized by SN II, SN Ia, and AGB stars. This enables a deeper interpretation of the information encoded in the phylogenetic trees. We follow the chemical evolution of two sets of gas particles selected from an inner and outer ring of the disc, and trace their transformation into stars. By con-structing phylogenetic trees purely based on the resulting stellar abundances, we investigate whether tree structure encodes di ff er-  

> 1A hierarchical tree characterized by minimal branching and the absence of prominent clades, as expected when stars form from an ISM continuously enriched by previous stellar generations, without ex-change of material with the surrounding medium. Article number, page 2 Brian Tapia-Contreras †et al.: Reconstructing chemical enrichment pathways in disc galaxies

ences in star formation and enrichment history between regions. Additional information, such as positions, velocities, and ages, is widely used in astronomy to assess the membership of a star in a given group using clustering algorithms. We emphasise that our approach relies on chemical information alone, while still providing evolutionary insight through the structure of the trees. This study takes a step further by assessing the potential of phy-logenetic methods in a controlled chemo-dynamical framework, aiming to complement classical modelling and simulations with a novel approach to decoding the chemical memory of galaxies. This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the numerical experiment. Section 3 discusses the enrichment his-tories of the selected target particles. Section 4 revisits galac-tic phylogenetics, expands upon the global concepts outlined in the Introduction and applies the method to reconstruct chemi-cal enrichment histories. In Section 5, the phylogenetic trees are interpreted using the numerical histories and compared through standard measures borrowed from biology. Finally, in the Con-clusions we summarize our main results. 

2. The Origins simulation 

For this work, we designed and performed a tailored simulation, dubbed Origins, representing a Milky Way-mass galaxy evolv-ing in isolation. The initial condition (IC) of Origins adopts an exponential disc with a total mass of M ∗ = 1.2 × 10 10 M⊙ with a minimum gas mass resolution of 1 .2 × 10 5M⊙. It contains an initial gas fraction of fgas = 0.20. The bulge component is rep-resented with a Hernquist potential (Hernquist 1990), while the dark matter halo is modeled using a NFW potential with c = 14 (Navarro et al. 1996, 1997). The gravitational softening is 0.20 kpc for the gas and star particles, and 0.32 kpc for the dark mat-ter ones. This simulation was run for about 3 Gyr with a temporal cadence of 5 Myr. The IC was run without allowing star forma-tion to take place until the bar formed and stabilized. This was done to avoid a significant fraction of the gas near the central region falling into the bar. However, as explained in the follow-ing section some gas particles in the nearby region did reach the very central region. The simulation was performed by using an updated ver-sion of the Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamical (SPH) code P-GADGET-3, which includes a multiphase treatment for the ISM and the SN feedback models reported byScannapieco et al. (2005, 2006). The chemical model has been updated from that used in the CIELO project (Rodríguez et al. 2022; Cataldi et al. 2023; Casanueva-Villarreal et al. 2024; Gonzalez-Jara et al. 2025; Tissera et al. 2025). The current version includes metal-dependent cooling rates reported by Wiersma et al. (2009, see Sillero et al. in prep.). For optically thin gas in ionization equi-librium, these rates are calculated on an element-by-element basis and consider the e ff ects of photoionization from a uni-form, redshift-dependent ionizing background (Haardt & Madau 2001). The initial gas composition is primordial, containing only hydrogen and helium with mass fractions X = 0.76 and Y =

0.24, respectively. The metallicity is set to Z = 0, where Z repre-sents the mass fraction of all elements heavier than hydrogen and helium. The gas is transformed into stars if it satisfies a density and temperature thresholds following the Kennicutt-Schmidt law (e.g. Pedrosa & Tissera 2015; Sillero et al. 2017). We adopted an initial mass function of Salpeter (1955), with minimum and maximum mass cut-o ff s of 0.1 and 120 M ⊙, respectively. Each gas particle represents a gas cloud with certain chemical abun-dances that are inherited by a star particle, representing a single stellar population (SSP). For simplicity we will keep using the gas and star particles throughout the paper. 

> 2.1. The chemical evolution model

The chemical enrichment is produced by SNII SNIa and AGBs. We followed 22 isotopes: 1H, 4He, 12 C, 13 C, 14 N, 15 N, 16 O, 20 Ne, 

> 22

Ne, 23 Na, 24 Mg, 25 Mg, 26 Mg, 27 Al, 28 Si, 32 S, 40 Ca, 54 Fe, 56 Fe For SNII, the production of new elements is calculated us-ing the nucleosynthesis models of Nomoto et al. (2013). The life-time of massive stars that end as SNII are estimated by us-ing the metallicity-dependent scheme reported by Raiteri et al. (1996). For SNIa, we assume the delay time distribution (DTD) scheme associated with a single degenerate progenitor scenario (Mosconi et al. 2001; Matteucci 2021, see also Jiménez et al. (2015)) for the binary system. The production of new elements by SNIa is taken from Iwamoto et al. (1999). Finally, the iso-topes ejected by stars in the AGB stage are taking from Karakas (2010), which are a function of the metallicity and age. The AGB nucleosynthesis contributions are only injected into the cold gas phase, while the enriched material expelled by SNe is distributed 70% in the cold phase and the remaining in the hot phase (see Scannapieco et al. 2005). The energy injected by SNII and SNIa are equally distributed within the cold and hot environments of the corresponding SSP. The energy injected into the hot phase is instantaneously ther-malised, while the energy deposited in the cold phase is reserved until it accumulates to a level comparable to the average energy presented by neighbouring hot gas particles and therefore su ffi -cient to promote the cold gas to a hot phase. The ejection and mixing of chemical elements is an im-portant process which is, in this simulation, modelled follow-ing Mosconi et al. (2001). These authors proposed to weight the metal contribution to the gas neighbour particles of a given donor star by the same kernel used by the SPH to estimate the hydro-dynamical properties (see also Wiersma et al. 2009). We note, however, that the smoothing lengths used to distribute the chem-ical elements are estimated on particle-by-particle basis at each time that this process is needed. Hence this produces a di ff er-ent mixing of the chemical elements produced by SNII, SNIa or AGBs since they have di ff erent life-times and gas and stars follow distinct evolutionary paths. As a result, the di ff erential mixing can imprint di ff erent features in the chemical patterns of the stellar populations (see also Zhang et al. 2025), which could be reflected in the structure of the phylogenetic trees. To assess the capability of phylogenetic trees to decode the chemical evolution of the ISM by using stellar populations, we need to store the complete exchange of material between stellar and gas particles. To follow the enrichment history of gas parti-cles, we include a feature in the code to store the contributions of chemical elements received by a gas particle (hereafter referred to as the target) from surrounding stellar particles (hereafter re-ferred to as the donors). This exchange of chemical elements is stored until the gas particle is converted into stars. Additionally, we tracked the chemical contributions produced by new star par-ticles and injected into neighbouring gas particles throughout the integration period. In this way we follow the enrichment history on particle-by-particle basis, and identify the origin of each con-tribution produced by a donor stellar particle or received by a target gas particle. It is worth noting that only the abundances of gas particles evolve as a result of stellar evolution. The chemi-cal content of each stellar particle remains fixed, matching the chemical abundances of the progenitor gas particle at the time of its transformation into stars. Given the large volume of data  

> Article number, page 3 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa_origins

Fig. 1: Face-on and edge-on projected gas (left) and stellar (right) density distribution of the simulated galaxy. The inner, r ∈ [2 , 4] kpc and outer, r ∈ [7 , 9] kpc, rings are indicated by the shaded purple and orange regions, respectively. The left panel shows the initial gas distribution and the right panel the final stellar distribution. Empty and filled circles depict target gas and stellar particles, respectively. involved in tracking the full exchange of material between par-ticles, we adopt a tracer-based approach by selecting a represen-tative subset of gas particles at the beginning of the simulation, hereafter referred to as target particles, to follow their chemical enrichment history. As explained in the following section, we de-fine two regions of interest in the disc: one adjacent to the bulge, and another located in the disc component. Within each of the two regions we selected the target particles. 

> 2.2. Target regions

The selection of the target particles was done at the initial time of the simulation, t = 0. We defined two rings of 2 kpc wide each and randomly took 1000 gas particles in each of them. The so-called inner and outer rings were located at 3 kpc and 8 kpc from the galactic centre. Because of the dynamical evolution, spiral arms and a bar were formed. These features are e ffi cient at redistributing angular momentum and hence, particles. In do-ing so, they contribute to mixing the gas and stars, sometimes displacing them from their host rings. We stress that the gas par-ticles in both rings with primordial metallicity (see Sec. 2.1) and are afterwards enriched by the surrounding donor stars. Due to the di ff erent star formation history of each ring, after ∼ 3.5 Gyr of evolution, there are 808 and 443 stellar particles with Z > 0formed from target gas particles originally belonging to the inner and outer rings, respectively. In Fig. 1 we display both the initial gas density distribution (left panel) and the final stellar density distribution (right panel). The regions corresponding to the inner and outer rings are shown (purple and orange shaded regions, respectively), along with the positions of the target particles, displayed as empty circles for gas and filled circles for stars. In Fig. 2, we present the star formation rate (SFR) of the entire galaxy, along with that measured within each of the two rings. Overall, the SFR declines over time, although a minor burst is evident around 1 Gyr. At early times, the inner ring ex-hibits a higher SFR than the outer ring, driven by the higher gas densities near the galactic centre. Rapid gas consumption, combined with bar-driven gas inflows toward the central regions, leads to a fast decline in star formation activity in the inner ring. In contrast, the outer ring exhibits a lower initial SFR, but it is more steadily sustained over time. The spatial distribution of target particles at the final stage of the simulation (see right panel in Fig. 1) reveals the impact of the bar, as most particles from the inner ring have migrated toward the central region. Only a few target particles of the inner ring moved outward. In contrast, most of the target particles from the outer ring remain there, with approximately 60% still in the gas phase after 3.5 Gyr of evolution. 

3. Enrichment history of the inner and outer rings 

Because of both the di ff erent star formation histories and the dy-namical evolution, the target gas particles in the inner ring are more rapidly enriched to higher levels than those in the outer ring. This can be clearly seen in Fig. 3, which displays the level  

> Article number, page 4 Brian Tapia-Contreras †et al.: Reconstructing chemical enrichment pathways in disc galaxies

Fig. 2: Time evolution of the star formation rate for the whole galaxy (black line) and the inner and outer rings (purple and orange lines, respectively). After 3.5 Gyr of evolution the star formation of the inner region decreases by almost three order of magnitude while the outer region, shows a more steadily de-cresing star formation activity. of [O /H], [Fe /H] and [N /H] 2 abundances as a function of time for the target gas particles located in both rings until the time they become stellar particles. We chose to show these three ele-ments since they have di ff erent main stellar progenitors for the adopted yields: SNII, SNIa, and AGB, respectively. We stress the fact that there are no di ff usion mechanisms other than the mix-ing by injection and the dynamical evolution of the gas and stars. Although this approach may introduce some noise, it allows us to follow the origin of each chemical contribution produced by the three di ff erent stellar progenitors included in our chemical model. From Fig. 3, we also find that the gas particles in the inner ring are enriched earlier than those in the outer ring. The central regions exhibit higher chemical enrichment, with [O /H] about 0.30 dex greater, and both [Fe /H] and [N /H] enriched by roughly 0.4 dex compared to the outer ring. From this figure we can also appreciate the delay in the injection of Fe and N with respect to O. The histories of enrichment are also modulated by the star formation history of the rings. The global trends are evident from the median values, but a diversity of behaviours is also observed at the particle level, as indicated by the scatter in the relation. In order to quantify the rate of enrichment that each gas par-ticle has before being converted into stars, we define the chemi-cal enrichment rate, denoted as μX for a given chemical element X, as the total mass of that element received by a gas particle per unit time. This quantity captures the cumulative e ff ect of all enrichment events experienced by a gas particle before its con-version into a stellar population. Given the variety of enrichment channels, namely, SNe II, SNe Ia, and AGB stars, and their dis-tinct timescales, the local star formation history, and the dynami-cal evolution of both gas and stars, μX is expected to vary signifi-cantly between di ff erent elements and across di ff erent regions of the galaxy. In Appendix A, we explore in more detail the correla-tions between the enrichment rates of di ff erent elements, as well as the intrinsic di ff erences between the inner and outer rings. We will use μX to interpret our results in Section 4.               

> 2We adopt the standard definition of [X /H] as the logarithmic ra-tio between the number densities of element Xand hydrogen, relative to their solar values, expressed in dex, i.e. [X /H] =log 10 (nX/nH)−
> log 10 (nX/nH)⊙, where nXand nHdenote the number densities of the cor-responding elements.

Another way to examine the evolution of chemical abun-dances is through their variation as a function of stellar popu-lation age 3, as captured by the age–metallicity relation (AMR). The AMR serves as a fossil record for the cumulative enrichment of the ISM, as shown in Fig. 3. In Fig. 4 we display the AMRs built by using the three adopted chemical abundances. Stellar populations in the outer ring are younger than those in the in-ner ring, with a median age approximately half that of the inner population. As expected, the stellar populations in the inner ring exhibit systematically higher levels of chemical enrichment and a faster enrichment rate during the first few Myr compared to those in the outer ring. The AMR in the inner ring also displays a distinct double sequence, particularly evident in [Fe /H] and [N /H]. The more metal-rich sequence arises from the injection of iron and nitrogen (through SNIa and AGB feedback) by older stellar populations that migrated from the inner ring into the very central region 4. These older stars formed in a central burst a few Gyr ago. Since the target particles in the outer ring do not mi-grate to the very central region and there is no pre-existing older populations, this e ff ect is not observed and the AMR behaves as one smooth sequence. Evidence for a bifurcated AMR in the MW has been found in both globular clusters (see, e.g. Leaman et al. 2013) and indi-vidual stars (e.g. Nissen et al. 2020), mostly in the solar neigh-bourhood (Jofré et al. 2017). Semi-analytical and fully analyt-ical models, including one- and multizone chemical evolution frameworks, have shown that such bifurcations can naturally arise in two-infall scenarios, where the abundance is reset by accretion of metal-poor gas (Chiappini et al. 1997; Spitoni et al. 2021; Palicio et al. 2023). In our isolated galaxy simulation, the emergence of two distinct AMR sequences is produced by the bar, which drives gas inflows from the inner ring into the central region at di ff erent epochs. In order to characterise the enrichment process of the target SSPs in the selected rings, Fig. 5 shows the distribution of the stellar mass fractions contributed by individual donor particles. The upper panel presents these contributions as a function of the galactocentric radius of the donors, measured at the time they in-ject chemical elements into the target particles, while the lower panel shows the distribution as a function of the relative distance between each target SSP and its corresponding donors, also eval-uated at the time of enrichment. In both panels, results are shown separately for the inner and outer rings. All distributions are nor-malised to the total stellar mass of the corresponding ring. The bimodality in the distribution for the inner ring can be associated with the target particles that migrated into the cen-tral region (shorter distances) and those that either remained in the ring or, in a very small fraction of cases, migrated outwards. The outer ring shows no significant bimodality consistent with a more quiescent history of enrichment. The shaded areas in the upper panel denote the regions originally mapped by the inner and outer gas samples. From these figures we can also appreci-ate that the gas particles in the outer ring, a region dominated by the spiral arms, receive chemical elements from wider than the original distribution. The larger distances between particles in the outer ring can be also explained because of the lower density in the disc than in the central region. We can visualize this from Fig. 1.       

> 3The stellar age is obtained by subtracting the star formation time (SFT) from the final time up to which the simulation was run.
> 4We define the central region of the galaxies as the region located inside the inner ring, i.e., at r<2 kpc. Article number, page 5 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa_origins

Fig. 3: Enrichment histories of target gas particles in the in-ner (purple, left column) and outer (orange, right column) rings. Three chemical abundances with di ff erent dominant stellar pro-genitors are shown: [Fe /H], [O /H], and [N /H] (top, middle, and bottom rows, respectively). For each ring, the background map illustrates the individual evolution of gas particles, while the solid line indicates the median abundance and the shaded regions correspond to the 25th and 75th percentiles. The right panels show violin plots of the [X /H] distributions with overlaid box plots indicating the median and interquartile range. The analysis presented in this section shows the cycle set by the injection of chemical elements from di ff erent stellar progen-itors (donors) into the ISM, which are then converted into stars and retain the chemical pattern of the parent gas particle. This in-formation provides a basis for interpreting the phylogenetic trees constructed under the hypothesis that chemical abundances be-have as evolutionary traits, from which the history of chemical evolution can be reconstructed. 

4. Galactic Phylogenetics 

We constructed phylogenetic trees using the target SSPs from the inner and outer rings, whose chemical enrichment histories were discussed in the previous section. A full detailed discussion on the basis of galactic phylogenetics is given by Jofré et al. (2017) and de Brito Silva et al. (2024). Here, we briefly comment on the main concepts adapted to astrophysics. As mentioned in the Introduction, the structure of a phylogenetic tree is defined by its branching pattern, which reflects relationships among the stellar populations. In biologi-cal contexts, tips correspond to present-day species, and inter-nal nodes represent their most recent common ancestors. In our case, the tips represent present-day stellar populations with spe-cific chemical abundances and ages—serving as fossil records of now-extinct phases of the interstellar medium (ISM). Distance matrices provide a quantitative measure of dissim-ilarity between stars based on observed traits. In our case, these traits are the chemical abundance ratios of the stellar popula-tions, expressed in the standard logarithmic notation [X /H] (see Sec. 3). Chemical elements is a suitable phylogenetic trait be-cause they are inherited and altered across successive genera-tions through astration and ISM enrichment (“descent with mod-ification”), which enables a direct connection to phylogenetic reasoning (Jofré et al. 2017). We therefore construct a chemical distance matrix by computing the chemical distance 5 between each particle and all others in the selected sample. Based on this matrix, we estimate phylogenetic trees using the neighbour-joining (NJ) algorithm (e.g. Gascuel 2006). NJ is a distance-based method, hence, its branch lengths are estimated directly from the input distance matrix and thus inherit its units; conse-quently, branch lengths in our trees are expressed in dex units, and the chemical distance between any two leaves is obtained by summing the branch lengths along the path connecting them (see the detailed discussion in Jofré et al. 2017). Our trees are rooted. Rooting a tree is a critical component as the root represents the base of the phylogeny - the earliest common ancestor from which all other lineages have evolved. Thus, by defining the root of the tree we can infer the direction of evolutionary relationships so that the more distant a branch is from the root the more evolutionary change separates it from the origin of the tree. Most biological rooting methods rely on spe-cific evolutionary models that are not directly applicable to astro-physical contexts. However, because we work with a simulated galaxy, we have knowledge of the formation times of all stellar particles. We therefore adopt a physically motivated approach by selecting the oldest stellar particle, formed with a lower level of enrichment than the target particles. The age and abundance of the selected stellar particle are shown in Fig. 4 for reference. The root is shared by all the simulated trees throughout this work. We used the same root for both regions since they both start from primordial metallicity. The root provides a meaningful temporal reference for the tree, under the assumption that existing stellar populations en-riched the ISM, from which subsequent generations of stars formed, thereby establishing a hierarchical pattern of chemical evolution. In a closed-box system, it is assumed that the ISM is continuously enriched by the existing stellar populations, lead-ing to newly formed stars with increasingly higher metallicities. This process naturally establishes a hierarchy, from old, metal-poor populations to young, metal-rich ones. This hierarchy can be broken when material is allowed to flow in or out of the sys-tem. Hence, this assumption is rarely valid in a cosmological context of galaxy formation, where processes such as gas infall, outflows, and stellar redistribution (e.g. migration) can break the chemical hierarchy. These mechanisms introduce complex fea-tures in the NJ trees that require more detailed analysis, best ad-dressed through numerical simulations. Regarding the number of stellar particles used to build the phylogenetic trees, as discussed by de Brito Silva et al. (2024), although there are sample-to-sample variations, a minimum of 200 stellar particles is su ffi cient to construct trees that signif-icantly deviate from a random distribution of chemical abun-dances. In this work, we adopt 400 stellar particles per region, randomly selected from the full sample of target particles. In the following section, we present a representative example of such a tree for each ring. The size of the underlying sample ensures that the inferred trends are representative of the full stellar pop-  

> 5We use Euclidean distances in [X /H] space following previous works (see de Brito Silva et al. 2024). Article number, page 6 Brian Tapia-Contreras †et al.: Reconstructing chemical enrichment pathways in disc galaxies

Fig. 4: The age-metallicity relation (AMR) of the stellar populations in the inner ring (purple squares) and outer ring (orange squares). The global AMR is displayed in the background for reference (gray dots). The solar values are depicted by horizontal dotted lines. The SSP (star particle) taken as the root is also included (red cross). 

Fig. 5: Upper panel: Histogram of the radii of the donor parti-cles for target gas particles in the inner (corresponding ring. The shaded regions correspond to the definition (in kpc) of each ring. Lower panel: Distance between the target and the donor particles in the inner and outer rings. ulation in each region, while remaining su ffi ciently limited to prevent saturation of the phylogenetic trees. With these trees, we aim to explore the information they en-code. In particular, the complex evolution of the central region, including the formation of the bar, o ff ers the opportunity to in-vestigate how this dynamical evolution is imprinted on the chem-ical abundances of the stellar populations and reflected in the structure of the phylogenetic trees. 

> 4.1. Phylogenetic trees of the target SSPs in the inner ring

The gas particles selected as targets in the inner region followed di ff erent evolutionary paths as already discussed. The central re-gion of the disc developed a bar due to internal instability, as can be seen from Fig. 1. As expected, the bar triggers gas inflows and, as a results, 64% of the inner ring mass fraction fall along the bar. The phylogenetic tree of the inner regions is displayed in Fig. 6. Each panel shows the same tree coloured by stellar age, [Fe /H], [O /Fe], and [N /Fe]. Globally, we observe that younger SSPs tend to exhibit systematically higher [Fe /H], lower [O /Fe], and higher [N /Fe], as expected from the standard chemical en-richment arguments discussed above. However, the tree does not present a strict caterpillar structure particularly evident in [Fe /H], displaying a systematic variation of age and metallicity from the root to the most distant SSPs (see de Brito Silva et al. 2024; Jofré et al. 2025, for a more extended discussion). Instead, it features noticeable clustering of SSPs, which we refer to as branches or clades. In evolutionary biology, clades often indi-cate a distinct population of species sharing a common ancestry. In the astrophysical context, these clades suggest the presence of groups of stars with a common enrichment history that deviates from the main hierarchical trend. Notably, within these clades the expected age gradient is disrupted, such that some branches include SSPs located further from the root that are, in fact, older. In particular, one prominent clade (dubbed main clade , see Fig. 6) is composed predominantly of old SSPs. This apparent inversion in the age hierarchy arises because the tree is con-structed solely based on chemical abundances, without incor-porating temporal information. These stars exhibit intermediate [Fe /H], high [O /Fe], and low [N /Fe], consistent being formed from an ISM enriched predominantly by SNII linked to current star formation activity, but which was already polluted by SNIa and AGB stars. This chemical pattern suggests that these SSPs formed during an early, bursty star formation episode, consis-tent with a rapid injection of iron and oxygen. We also note that  

> Article number, page 7 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa_origins

smaller clades exhibit age and abundance-ratio patterns similar to those of the main clade, suggesting analogous processes oper-ating on smaller scales or being under-represented in the random sample. The recovery of the hierarchical structure is consistent with the action of gas inflows and material redistribution driven by the bar. Further away from the root, at higher metallicities, en-richment is dominated by older stars in the central region, whose delayed feedback enriches the ISM primarily through SNIa and AGB channels. As a result, these SSPs show lower [O /Fe] and higher [N /Fe], and the tree presents with a strong hierarchy pat-tern. Younger, more chemically enriched stars are distributed in a more hierarchical manner for the three selected chemical ele-ments. However, a mix of stellar ages is found, resulting from the e ffi cient mixing of chemical elements and the influence of bar-driven inflows. 

> 4.2. Phylogenetic trees of the target SSPs in the outer ring

Figure 7 shows the phylogenetic tree for SSPs in the outer ring. Here, the tree exhibits a more caterpillar-like structure. Never-theless, some short clades are present, indicating mild departures from symmetry, likely associated with the formation of spiral arms and substructures along them. The ISM in this region ap-pears more inhomogeneous, as reflected by the presence of these shorter clades. This inhomogeneity arises in part from the di ff er-ent production and ejection timescales of oxygen, iron, and ni-trogen. These enrichment sources operate on distinct timescales that are strongly dependent on both stellar mass and metallic-ity. Since our simulations account for these e ff ects in a self-consistent manner, di ff erential mixing is naturally expected. In addition, gas and stars follow their own dynamical evo-lution. The formation of the bar and spiral arms induces large-scale motions that mix both components, shaping the spatial dis-tribution of the injected elements. Star formation occurs pref-erentially along spiral arms and in clumps, introducing further complexity to the chemical enrichment patterns. These dynami-cal features modulate the e ffi ciency and spatial scale of chemical mixing, thereby contributing to the observed chemical inhomo-geneities. We find that, depending on the strength of star formation and the importance of central gas inflows, distinct imprints can emerge in the phylogenetic trees. In the case of the inner ring, this is reflected both in the presence of a well-populated clade and in the strong hierarchical structure observed near the tips of the tree. In contrast, regions that follow a more steady evolution-ary path—characterised by sustained star formation and gradual mixing—display phylogenetic trees that encode a smoother en-richment history. These trees exhibit an overall hierarchical pat-tern of chemical evolution, populated by short clades that reflect a more chemically heterogeneous ISM. To assess the robustness of the inferred phylogenetic signal, we constructed phylogenetic trees from mixed samples combin-ing stellar populations from the inner and outer rings. The de-tails can be found in Appendix C. We find that the resulting tree structure di ff ers significantly from those obtained for the individ-ual regions, reflecting the intrinsic chemical contrasts between the two parent populations. In particular, clades identified in the individual trees are not always preserved in the mixed case, as chemically similar populations from di ff erent regions can redis-tribute along the tree, leading to the emergence of new dominant clades and the partial dissolution of pre-existing ones. Statisti-cal analysis based on the Colless imbalance index shows that the mixed trees exhibit an intermediate degree of imbalance be-tween the inner- and outer-ring cases, while remaining statisti-cally distinct from both. These results highlight the sensitivity of phylogenetic reconstructions to sample composition. However, the phylogenetic signal remains consistent with the evolutionary history of the selected populations; the main challenge lies in disentangling this signal adequately. We will further explore this aspect in a forthcoming paper. 

5. Discussion 

> 5.1. Rate of chemical enrichment

Here we make use of the chemical enrichment rates, μX, defined in Section 3 . These rates encodes valuable information about the timing, origin, and e ffi ciency of enrichment, particularly in regions with complex dynamical histories. For instance, an early, rapid enrichment dominated by SNII should manifest as a sharp increase in μO, while a slower, delayed contribution from SNIa and AGB stars would shape μFe and μN di ff erently. These dif-ferences encode aspects of the enrichment history not directly visible in the present-day abundances (see also Appendix A). Figures 8 and 9 show the same phylogenetic trees presented in Figs. 6 and 7, but colour-coded by the enrichment rate μX of the three representative elements: iron, oxygen, and nitrogen. These enrichment rates provide a complementary view of the stellar populations chemical histories. In the inner ring (Fig. 8), the main clade shows relatively low enrichment rates in nitrogen, but enhanced μO values fol-lowed by μFe , consistent with rapid early enrichment by SNII-dominated feedback. This supports our previous interpretation that these stars formed during an early starburst phase, followed by prompt oxygen injection and limited contribution from de-layed sources. Toward the end of the tree, where younger pop-ulations are found, the enrichment rates for nitrogen and iron are significantly higher, reflecting the growing contribution from SNIa and AGB stars as the system evolves embedded in the cen-tral region. In contrast, the outer ring tree (Fig.9) displays a smoother distribution of enrichment rates along the tree. While short clades exist, their enrichment patterns are more continuous, with fewer sharp contrasts. This is consistent with the more gradual and extended star formation history inferred from the [Fe /H], [O /Fe], and age distributions in Fig. 7. The presence of overlap-ping enrichment rates at similar branch length again reflects the stochastic nature of enrichment in a more chemically heteroge-neous ISM. This is particularly evident in the short clades, where the enrichment rates are similar for the three tracers in contrast to the inner ring. This shows the coexistence of di ff erent stellar populations with di ff erent ages. This is explained by the fact that the outer ring shows a more continuous star formation history (Fig. 2). Taken together, the enrichment rates reinforce the view that the structure of the phylogenetic trees is shaped not only by the absolute abundance values, but also by the underlying temporal sequence and strength of chemical contributions from di ff erent channels (see also Appendix A). 

> 5.2. Comparing phylogenetic trees: Tree balance

To enable a more robust comparison of the trees from the two regions, we aim to adopt approaches commonly used in biol-ogy to quantitatively evaluate phylogenetic trees. In particular, we compute the Corrected Colless (CC) index (Heard 1992;  

> Article number, page 8 Brian Tapia-Contreras †et al.: Reconstructing chemical enrichment pathways in disc galaxies

Fig. 6: Phylogenetic tree constructed with 400 target stellar particles randomly selected from the inner ring. Color indicates the age of the stellar particles (left), their iron abundance ([Fe /H]; centre), and their oxygen and nitrogen abundance ([O /Fe] and [N /Fe]; right). Branch lengths are shown to scale only in the leftmost tree; in the other panels the trees are laterally shifted for easier visual comparison. The x-axis is displayed on a power-law scale to enhance visual clarity. The boxed region highlights the main clade discussed in the text. The root is located at the top left of each tree and is highlighted by a red contour. 

Fig. 7: Same as Fig. 6 but for 400 stellar particles randomly selected from the outer ring. Note that the root is common to the inner-and outer-ring trees and is located at the top left of each tree and highlighted by a red contour. Kirxpatrick & Slatkin 1993, see also Fischer et al. (2023)), a standard measure of tree imbalance. This index quantifies the asymmetry of a rooted tree, with higher values indicating more imbalance. In our context, a higher CC index can be interpreted as a more hierarchical chemical enrichment history, where cer-tain evolutionary paths dominate the formation of stellar popula-tions. The measure of tree balance o ff er a complementary insight into the structure and assembly history encoded in the phyloge-netic trees, reflecting the asymmetry and hierarchical nature of enrichment.  

> Article number, page 9 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa_origins

Fig. 8: Phylogenetic Tree of the inner ring (same as in Fig. 6) coloured by the chemical enrichment rate of iron (left tree), oxygen (central tree), and nitrogen (right tree). The boxed region highlights the main clade discussed in the text. 

Fig. 9: Phylogenetic Tree of the outer ring (same as in Fig. 7) coloured by the chemical enrichment rate of iron (left tree), oxygen (central tree), and nitrogen (right tree). In order to compute this index, we generated 1000 random phylogenetic trees for the inner and outer SSP samples. Fig.10 shows the distribution of the CC index for trees constructed from inner (purple) and outer (orange) ring particles. As expected, the trees from the inner ring tend to be more imbalanced, reflecting the strong hierarchy observed within the main clade, and at the metal-rich end of the tree (see Fig.6). This supports the interpre-tation that the inner region experienced a more structured and burst-driven enrichment history. We performed a Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) test to compare the distributions of the CC index between the inner and outer ring trees. The KS test yields p-values ∼ 0, confirming that the distributions are statistically distinct. This demonstrates that the di ff erences in tree morphology between the two regions are ro- 

> Article number, page 10 Brian Tapia-Contreras †et al.: Reconstructing chemical enrichment pathways in disc galaxies

Fig. 10: Distribution of tree balance metric, the CC index, com-puted for a sample of 1000 phylogenetic trees built from 400 SSPs randomly selected from the inner (purple) and outer (or-ange) rings. 

Fig. 11: Convergence of CC tree shape index, as a function of number of stellar particles adopted to build the tree (N SSP ). Shaded regions depict the 25th–75th percentile range. The up-per sub-panel display the Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) statistic between the inner and outer ring distributions at each N SSP ; p-values are close to zero in every case. bust, even when using randomly selected subsets of stellar pop-ulations. It is important to note that other tree–comparison techniques commonly used in biology (see, e.g., Fischer et al. 2023) are not straightforward to apply in astrophysics, given the di ff erent na-ture of the data and the assumptions on evolutionary traits. This underscores the need to adapt some of these metrics to the as-trophysical context, or alternatively to develop new, more gen-eral methodologies based on the intrinsic properties of the trees themselves (Signor et al., in prep.). 

> 5.3. Tree balance convergence with N SSP

We also addressed the robustness of the tree balance metric—CC index—as a function of the number of stellar particles used to build the phylogenetic trees (N SSP ). This analysis is essential to assess how sensitive the inferred evolutionary features are to sampling size, and whether the morphological di ff erences be-tween the inner and outer ring trees persist across di ff erent real-izations. Figure 11 shows the variation of the CC index as a function of N SSP , for values ranging from 100 to 400. The shaded regions indicate the 25 and 75 percentiles across the 1000 random real-izations per region. For comparison, we also include a control sample generated from randomly generated SSPs 6 (gray points), which serves as a baseline representing chemically unstructured populations. We observe that the CC index decreases with increasing N SSP 

for all cases. This suggests that larger samples tend to produce more balanced trees. The e ff ect likely arises because clades be-come more populated, which reduces the apparent asymmetry introduced by sampling noise when only a small number of par-ticles is used. However, across all N, the inner ring trees consis-tently show higher CC values than the outer ring, confirming that the inner region retains a more imbalance structure regardless of sample size. In contrast, the random sample remains nearly flat and close to zero, as expected from trees with no internal chem-ical structure, expected to be perfectly balanced. The upper small panels show the outcome of the Kol-mogorov–Smirnov (KS) test performed between the inner and outer ring distributions at each N. The consistently high KS val-ues ( > 0.75; with p-values ∼ 0 in every case) demonstrate that the di ff erences between the two populations are statistically sig-nificant even for small samples (N SSP = 100), and remain robust as N SSP increases. This confirms that the morphological signa-tures identified in the trees are not sensitive to N SSP adopted for the sampling as long as N SSP > 100 (de Brito Silva et al. 2024). Hence the chemical enrichment histories of the inner and outer rings stored by the phylogenetic trees are genuinely distinct be-tween each other and di ff erent from a random metallicity distri-bution. 

6. Conclusions 

We have applied the phylogenetic method to a galaxy evolution simulation, to assess how it represents the evolution of stellar populations. Our simulation followed the chemical evolution of a isolated disc and we tracked the enrichment of a sample of gas targeted particles. They become stellar particles according to the subgrid physics and store the chemical patterns acquired by their parent gas particle. Two regions are tracked, one close to the cen-tre and the other one in the disc, where spiral arms developed. A bar structure appeared during the first stages of evolution, which has an impact on the dynamics of the surrounding ISM produc-ing gas inflows. This gas follows a di ff erent history in compari-son to the gas that remained in the original selected region. The outer ring gathers stellar populations which are a ff ected by the formation of arms and a more local exchange of chemical ele-ments with a weak azimuthal dependence. We analysed the phy-logenetic trees of each regions and found the following results.  

> 6The random sample was created by assigning, for each chemical el-ement, a random value drawn from a uniform distribution bounded by the minimum and maximum values measured across the entire target sample. Article number, page 11

A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa_origins 

– In the inner ring, the phylogenetic tree exhibits a well-defined clade composed of old stars enriched primarily by SNII. This structure reflects a strong star formation as probed by the enhanced oxygen abundances and high enrichment rates. At higher metallicities, the tree shows increasing con-tributions from SNIa and AGB stars, resulting in a hierarchi-cal pattern. 

– The outer ring shows a more continuous, caterpillar-like, and symmetric tree structure, with smaller clades and a smoother gradient in enrichment rates and abundances. This is consis-tent with a more extended and steady star formation history, supported by local mixing processes associated with spiral arms. 

– The chemical enrichment rates ( μX) provide an additional layer of interpretation for the tree structures. In the inner ring, they confirm a rapid early star formation episode (i.e. an quick chemical enrichment) that gave rise to a distinct clade, while the outer ring displays smoother and more uni-form rates, consistent with gradual and spatially extended en-richment. 

– We quantified tree morphology using a standard metric for tree balance: the Corrected Colless (CC) index. Trees from the inner ring show higher CC values, consistent with an early, hierarchical chemical evolution. Outer ring trees are more symmetric, reflecting recent, gradual enrichment. This di ff erence is statistically robust across 1000 random realiza-tions. 

– We also assessed the convergence of this index as a function of the number of stellar particles used to build the trees. The CC index show stable trends, and the di ff erences between in-ner and outer regions remain significant even for small sam-ples (N SSP = 100), as confirmed by high KS statistics. These results shows that galactic phylogenetics is a promis-ing and complementary tool for interpreting the fossil record of stellar populations, capable of reconstructing main features of the evolutionary pathways of distinct galactic regions purely from chemical information. This is important considering the di ffi culties involved in a robust estimation of stellar ages. We acknowledge the fact that NJ algorithm order stellar particles by similarities in their chemical pattern and does not assume any prior information. More sophisticated methods based on net-works could be powerful to study complex systems like galax-ies. However, from a numerical perspective, our findings pave the way for interpreting the tree-based analyses emerging from stellar surveys, proving a more e ffi cient way tool which does not require further model fitting. 

Acknowledgements. BTC gratefully acknowledges funding by ANID (Beca Doctorado Nacional, Folio 21232155). PBT acknowledges partial funding by FONDECYT-ANID 1240465 /2024 and Núcleo Milenio ERIS NCN2021_017. ES acknowledges funding by FONDECYT-ANID Postdoctoral 2024 Project N°3240644 and thanks the Núcleo Milenio ERIS NCN2021_017. PJ is sup-ported by FONDECYT Regular 1231057. TS acknowledges financial sup-port from Inria Chile ANID project CTI230007. PD is supported by a UKRI Future Leaders Fellowship (grant reference MR /S032223 /1). CAG acknowl-edges support from FONDECYT Iniciación 11230741. This project has re-ceived funding from the European Union Horizon 2020 Research and Innova-tion Programme under Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions (MSCA) grant agree-ment No. 101086388-LACEGAL. We acknowledge partial support by ANID BASAL project FB210003. This project used the Ladgerda Cluster (FONDE-CYT 1200703 /2020 hosted at the Institute for Astrophysics, Chile), the NLHPC (Centro de Modelamiento Matemático, Chile), and Geryon clusters (Center for Astrophysics, CATA, Chile). 

References 

Arrigoni, M., Trager, S. C., Somerville, R. S., & Gibson, B. K. 2010, MNRAS, 402, 173 Bellardini, M. A., Wetzel, A., Loebman, S. R., et al. 2021, MNRAS, 505, 4586 Bland-Hawthorn, J. & Freeman, K. C. 2003, in Astronomical Society of the Pa-cific Conference Series, Vol. 297, Star Formation Through Time, ed. E. Perez, R. M. Gonzalez Delgado, & G. Tenorio-Tagle, 457– +

Calura, F. & Menci, N. 2009, MNRAS, 400, 1347 Casanueva-Villarreal, C., Tissera, P. B., Padilla, N., et al. 2024, A&A, 688, A183 Cataldi, P., Pedrosa, S. E., Tissera, P. B., et al. 2023, MNRAS, 523, 1919 Chiappini, C., Matteucci, F., & Gratton, R. 1997, ApJ, 477, 765 Darwin, C. 1859, On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection (Lon-don: John Murray) de Brito Silva, D., Jofré, P., Tissera, P. B., et al. 2024, ApJ, 962, 154 De Rossi, M. E., Bower, R. G., Font, A. S., Schaye, J., & Theuns, T. 2017, MNRAS, 472, 3354 Deason, A. J. & Belokurov, V. 2024, New A Rev., 99, 101706 Fischer, M., Herbst, L., Kersting, S., Kühn, A. L., & Wicke, K. 2023 Fragkoudi, F., Grand, R. J. J., Pakmor, R., et al. 2020, MNRAS, 494, 5936 Garcia, A. M., Torrey, P., Hemler, Z. S., et al. 2023, MNRAS, 519, 4716 Gascuel, O. 2006, Molecular Biology and Evolution, 23, 1997 Gonzalez-Jara, J., Tissera, P. B., Monachesi, A., et al. 2025, A&A, 693, A282 Haardt, F. & Madau, P. 2001, in Clusters of Galaxies and the High Redshift Universe Observed in X-rays, ed. D. M. Neumann & J. T. V. Tran Heard, S. B. 1992, Evolution, 46, 1818 Helmi, A. 2020, ARA&A, 58, 205 Hemler, Z. S., Torrey, P., Qi, J., et al. 2021, MNRAS, 506, 3024 Hernquist, L. 1990, ApJ, 356, 359 Iwamoto, K., Brachwitz, F., Nomoto, K., et al. 1999, ApJS, 125, 439 Jackson, H., Jofré, P., Yaxley, K., et al. 2021, MNRAS, 502, 32 Jara-Ferreira, F., Tissera, P. B., Sillero, E., et al. 2024, MNRAS, 530, 1369 Jiménez, N., Tissera, P. B., & Matteucci, F. 2015, ApJ, 810, 137 Jofré, P., Aguilera-Gómez, C., Villarreal, P., et al. 2025, A&A, 699, A291 Jofré, P., Das, P., Bertranpetit, J., & Foley, R. 2017, MNRAS, 467, 1140 Johnson, J. W., Weinberg, D. H., Vincenzo, F., et al. 2021, MNRAS, 508, 4484 Karakas, A. I. 2010, MNRAS, 403, 1413 Kewley, L. J., Rupke, D., Zahid, H. J., Geller, M. J., & Barton, E. J. 2010, ApJL, 721, L48 Kirxpatrick, M. & Slatkin, M. 1993, Evolution, 47, 1171 Leaman, R., VandenBerg, D. A., & Mendel, J. T. 2013, MNRAS, 436, 122 Lia, C., Portinari, L., & Carraro, G. 2002, MNRAS, 330, 821 Ma, X., Hopkins, P. F., Wetzel, A. R., et al. 2017, MNRAS, 467, 2430 Matteucci, F. 2021, A&A Rev., 29, 5 Matteucci, F. & Greggio, L. 1986, A&A, 154, 279 Mollá, M. & Ferrini, F. 1995, ApJ, 454, 726 Mosconi, M. B., Tissera, P. B., Lambas, D. G., & Cora, S. A. 2001, MNRAS, 325, 34 Nagashima, M., Lacey, C. G., Okamoto, T., et al. 2005, MNRAS, 363, L31 Navarro, J. F., Frenk, C. S., & White, S. D. M. 1996, ApJ, 462, 563 Navarro, J. F., Frenk, C. S., & White, S. D. M. 1997, ApJ, 490, 493 Nissen, P. E., Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., Mosumgaard, J. R., et al. 2020, A&A, 640, A81 Nomoto, K., Kobayashi, C., & Tominaga, N. 2013, ARA&A, 51, 457 Palicio, P. A., Spitoni, E., Recio-Blanco, A., et al. 2023, A&A, 678, A61 Pedrosa, S. E. & Tissera, P. B. 2015, A&A, 584, A43 Perez, J., Michel-Dansac, L., & Tissera, P. B. 2011, MNRAS, 417, 580 Pipino, A. & Matteucci, F. 2011, A&A, 530, A98 Queiroz, A. B. A., Anders, F., Chiappini, C., et al. 2023, A&A, 673, A155 Raiteri, C. M., Villata, M., & Navarro, J. F. 1996, A&A, 315, 105 Recio-Blanco, A., de Laverny, P., Palicio, P. A., et al. 2023, A&A, 674, A29 Rodríguez, S., Garcia Lambas, D., Padilla, N. D., et al. 2022, MNRAS, 514, 6157 Rupke, D. S. N., Kewley, L. J., & Chien, L.-H. 2010, ApJ, 723, 1255 Salpeter, E. E. 1955, ApJ, 121, 161 Scannapieco, C., Tissera, P. B., White, S. D. M., & Springel, V. 2005, MNRAS, 364, 552 Scannapieco, C., Tissera, P. B., White, S. D. M., & Springel, V. 2006, MNRAS, 371, 1125 Sillero, E., Tissera, P. B., Lambas, D. G., & Michel-Dansac, L. 2017, MNRAS, 472, 4404 Spitoni, E., Verma, K., Silva Aguirre, V., et al. 2021, A&A, 647, A73 Tapia-Contreras, B., Tissera, P. B., Sillero, E., et al. 2025, A&A, 700, A69 Tau, E. A., Monachesi, A., Gomez, F. A., et al. 2025, A&A, 699, A93 Thomas, D., Greggio, L., & Bender, R. 1998, MNRAS, 296, 119 Tinsley, B. M. 1980, Fund. Cosmic Phys., 5, 287 Tissera, P. B., Bignone, L., Gonzalez-Jara, J., et al. 2025, A&A, 697, A134 Tissera, P. B., Pedrosa, S. E., Sillero, E., & Vilchez, J. M. 2016, MNRAS, 456, 2982 Tissera, P. B., Scannapieco, C., Beers, T. C., & Carollo, D. 2013, MNRAS, 432, 3391 Tissera, P. B., White, S. D. M., & Scannapieco, C. 2012, MNRAS, 420, 255 Walsen, K., Jofré, P., Buder, S., et al. 2024, MNRAS, 529, 2946 White, S. D. M. & Frenk, C. S. 1991, ApJ, 379, 52 Wiersma, R. P. C., Schaye, J., & Smith, B. D. 2009, MNRAS, 393, 99 Yates, R. M., Henriques, B., Thomas, P. A., et al. 2013, MNRAS, 435, 3500 Yates, R. M., Henriques, B. M. B., Fu, J., et al. 2021, MNRAS, 503, 4474 Zhang, C., Li, Z., Hu, Z., & Krumholz, M. R. 2025, MNRAS, 540, 3906 

Article number, page 12 Brian Tapia-Contreras † et al.: Reconstructing chemical enrichment pathways in disc galaxies 

Appendix A: Rates of chemical enrichment and abundance ratios 

Owing to the variety of enrichment channels and the distinct timescales associated with each process, the rate of chemical enrichment varies among di ff erent chemical species. In particular, as discussed throughout this paper, iron, oxygen, and nitrogen trace the chemical evolution driven by their dominant production channels: SNe Ia, SNe II, and AGB stars, respectively. Figure A.1 presents a comparison between the enrichment rates of di ff erent chemical species. Iron and nitrogen exhibit the tightest correlation (left panel), reflecting their similar enrichment timescales associated with SNe Ia and AGB stars. However, iron enrichment rates are systematically higher due to the additional contribution from SNe II. The di ff erences between inner and outer rings are significant, with inner regions typically showing higher rates—consistent with their proximity to the bulge and with the migration scenario discussed in the main body. The middle panel shows the relation between oxygen and iron enrichment rates. While still correlated, the scatter increases compared to the nitrogen–iron relation, reflecting the shorter timescales of oxygen production dominated by SNe II. The distinction between inner and outer regions is less noticeable. The right panel compares oxygen and nitrogen enrichment rates. This relation exhibits the largest scatter among the three, consistent with the distinct stellar sources and timescales involved—SNe II for oxygen and AGB stars for nitrogen. 

Fig. A.1: Chemical enrichment rates for nitrogen vs. iron (left), oxygen vs. iron (middle), and oxygen vs. nitrogen (right). The one-to-one relation is shown as a solid line.  

> Article number, page 13 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa_origins

Appendix B: Contribution to the α-enrichment from different regions 

In order to visualise from where target SSPs received their chemical elements in Fig. B.1, we display the well-known α-pattern for stars formed from gas originally in the inner and outer rings separated according to the regions where the most donors were at the time of injecting chemical elements into the ISM. The mass fraction of contributing chemical elements are shown by the colours. For the stellar particles originally formed from inner ring gas, those located at the high-metallicity end of the diagram are predominantly enriched by material from the innermost region, consistent with a bar-driven gas inflow scenario. The SSPs that remain in the ring can be easily identified in the middle panel. A few particles at the low-metallicity end appear to be enriched by either the innermost or outermost regions, with a distribution that seems stochastic. In the outer ring, the most metal-rich and low-α

particles are primarily enriched by material from the innermost regions, as expected. As in the inner ring case, only a small number of particles are enriched by material from the outermost regions. 

Fig. B.1: [O /Fe]-[Fe /H] diagrams for the inner ring target stellar particles. From left to right, colour coded by the fraction of enrichment from: (i) particles in the innermost regions; (ii) particles in the same ring; (iii) particles in the outermost regions. Darker colours indicate a higher fraction of enrichment from the respective region. We note that, for a SSP, the sum of the three contributions is always unity.  

> Article number, page 14 Brian Tapia-Contreras †et al.: Reconstructing chemical enrichment pathways in disc galaxies

Appendix C: Mixed inner and outer ring sample 

In this Appendix, we explore the phylogenetic tree derived from a mixed sample of stellar populations drawn from both the inner and outer rings. To ensure the same numerical representation than in the individual trees presented in Sec. 4, we fix the total number of SSPs to 400 by randomly selecting 200 particles from each ring. Given the extensive analysis already presented in the main text, we further ensure that the main clade identified in the inner-ring tree is fully represented in the mixed sample. To this end, all particles belonging to this clade are explicitly included in the construction of the mixed tree. 

Fig. C.1: Phylogenetic tree constructed with 400 target stellar particles selected from a mixed sample containing inner- and outer-ring particles. Color indicates the age of the stellar particles (left), their iron abundance ([Fe /H]; center), and their oxygen and nitrogen abundance ([O /Fe] and [N /Fe]; right). Branch lengths are shown to scale only in the leftmost tree (using the same scaling as in Figs. 6 & 7); in the other panels the trees are laterally shifted for easier visual comparison. Figure C.1 shows the phylogenetic tree of the mixed sample, presented in the same format as Figs. 6 and 7. The resulting topology di ff ers from that of the individual trees and is dominated by a prominent structure (hereafter Clade 1 ). This clade is primarily composed of stellar populations with low [O /Fe] and high [N /Fe] abundances. A secondary, smaller structure ( Clade 2 ) is also identified, containing stellar populations with high [O /Fe] and low [N /Fe]. In both cases, the age gradient along the branches is inverted, in qualitative agreement with the behaviour observed in the previously analysed trees. Between the root and Clade 1 , we identify an initial sequence (hereafter early sequence ) tracing the early chemical evolu-tion of the galaxy. Along this sequence, both age and [Fe /H] vary approximately monotonically, and most stellar populations are oxygen-rich. Variations in nitrogen abundance give rise to small substructures ( <10 particles), likely associated with individual AGB enrichment events. At the opposite end, between Clade 2 and the tip of the tree, we identify a late sequence tracing the most recent stages of chemical evolution and containing the most metal-rich particles in the simulation. This sequence is monotonic in [Fe /H], with consistently low [O /Fe] and high [N /Fe] abundances. The stellar ages follow the bifurcation of the AMR (see Fig. 4). In Fig. C.2, we compare the mixed tree (left panels) with the parent trees of the inner ring (upper right panel) and the outer ring (lower right panel) analysed in the main text. Particles are colour-coded according to their region of origin (purple for the inner ring and orange for the outer ring). Horizontal lines of matching colour trace the relative positions of individual particles in the original trees and their rearrangement in the mixed tree. Red lines highlight the members of the main clade in the original inner-ring tree. Overall, inner-ring particles tend to shift towards the tips of the tree, while outer-ring particles move closer to the root, consistent with the intrinsic chemical di ff erences between the two samples (i.e. the outer ring hosts more metal-poor populations). Deviations from this trend are associated with the emergence of new clades or the disruption of structures present in the original trees, ultimately restoring monotonic trends with age and iron abundance. The early sequence contains 62% outer-ring and 38% inner-ring particles. As discussed in Sec. 2.1, both rings originate from nearly pristine abundances; we therefore interpret this coexistence as evidence of a shared early enrichment history across the disc, lasting ∼ 1 Gyr, as indicated by the youngest stellar population in the sequence. 

Clade 1 is dominated by outer-ring particles (70%), which are rearranged relative to their configuration in the original tree. This suggests that the inclusion of inner-ring populations enhances chemical contrasts, strengthening the phylogenetic signal and isolating a distinct generation of outer-ring stars.  

> Article number, page 15 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa_origins

Fig. C.2: Phylogenetic trees of the mixed sample (left panels) compared to the original inner-ring (upper right panel) and outer-ring (lower right panel) trees. Points are colour-coded according to their region of origin (purple: inner ring; orange: outer ring). In the right panels, coloured points highlight the particles selected to construct the mixed tree. Red lines indicate the members of the main clade in the original inner-ring tree. The central panels show the correspondence between the positions of the selected particles in the original trees and their rearrangement in the mixed tree. Stellar populations in Clade 2 are nearly evenly split between the two regions (46% inner ring and 54% outer ring), consistent with an intermediate population sharing a similar enrichment history.  

> Article number, page 16 Brian Tapia-Contreras †et al.: Reconstructing chemical enrichment pathways in disc galaxies

Finally, the late sequence is predominantly composed of inner-ring SSPs (76%), as expected from their higher metallicities. Outer-ring particles in this sequence correspond to the high-metallicity tail of their distribution. All populations in this regime are characterised by low [O /Fe] and high [N /Fe] abundances. In summary, the mixed sample produces a phylogenetic structure that di ff ers from those of the individual regions, while still preserving the hierarchical imprint of their distinct chemical enrichment histories. The early stages reflect a shared enrichment pathway under initially pristine conditions, whereas later structures become increasingly segregated, with Clade 1 and the late sequence dominated by outer- and inner-ring populations, respectively, at comparable levels ( ∼ 70%). An intermediate population emerges in Clade 2 , linking both regimes, in qualitative agreement with observational studies based on samples comprising multiple stellar populations (Jofré et al. 2017, 2025). To assess the statistical robustness of tree shapes, and following the methodology introduced in Sect. 5.2, we generated 1000 random realisations of mixed trees, each constructed by randomly selecting 200 inner-ring and 200 outer-ring particles. Figure C.3 shows the resulting distribution of the Colless imbalance index (CC Index), compared to those of the inner- and outer-ring trees presented in Fig. 10. The mixed-sample distribution lies between those of the parent populations, indicating an intermediate degree of tree imbalance and confirming that the global phylogenetic structure reflects contributions from both components. The tails of the distribution correspond to realisations in which the phylogenetic signal is either enhanced or diluted, depending on the specific subsample. Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) tests further show that the mixed-sample distribution is statistically distinct from both the inner- and outer-ring cases. Overall, these results demonstrate that the phylogenetic approach robustly captures the combined chemical evolution of multiple stellar populations, while preserving key features of their individual enrichment histories. 

Fig. C.3: Distribution of the CC index for 1000 phylogenetic trees built from the mixed sample (red dotted region). Distributions obtained for the inner-ring and outer-ring trees (same as Fig. 10) are also displayed for comparison. The results of the KS tests comparing the mixed-sample distribution with those of the inner and outer rings are annotated in purple and orange, respectively.