Title: An abstract model of nonrandom, non-Lamarckian mutation in evolution using a multivariate estimation-of-distribution algorithm

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.12884v1

Published Time: Wed, 15 Apr 2026 01:21:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 62

Markdown Content:
# An abstract model of nonrandom, non-Lamarckian mutation in evolution using a multivariate estimation-of-distribution algorithm 

# Liudmyla Vasylenko, 1,2 Adi Livnat 1,2∗

> 1

Department of Evolutionary and Environmental Biology, University of Haifa, 3103301, Israel, 

> 2

Institute of Evolution, University of Haifa, 3103301, Israel  

> ∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed; E-mail: alivnat@univ.haifa.ac.il 

> arXiv:2604.12884v1 [cs.NE] 14 Apr 2026

Abstract: At the fundamental conceptual level, two alternatives have tradi-tionally been considered for how mutations arise and how evolution happens: 1) random mutation and natural selection, and 2) Lamarckism. Recently, the theory of Interaction-based Evolution (IBE) has been proposed, according to which mutations are neither random nor Lamarckian, but are influenced by information accumulating internally in the genome over generations. Based on the estimation-of-distribution algorithms framework, we present a simu-lation model that demonstrates nonrandom, non-Lamarckian mutation con-cretely while capturing indirectly several aspects of IBE: selection, recombina-tion, and nonrandom, non-Lamarckian mutation interact in a complementary fashion; evolution is driven by the interaction of parsimony and fit; and ran-dom bits do not directly encode improvement but enable generalization by the manner in which they connect with the rest of the evolutionary process. Con-nections are drawn to Darwin’s observations that changed conditions increase the rate of production of heritable variation; to the causes of bell-shaped dis-tributions of traits and how these distributions respond to selection; and to computational learning theory, where analogizing evolution to learning in ac-cord with IBE casts individuals as examples and places the learned hypothesis at the population level. The model highlights the importance of incorporating internal integration of information through heritable change in both evolu-tionary theory and evolutionary computation. 

# 1 Introduction 

For over a century, two alternatives at the fundamental conceptual level have dominated think-ing about mutation origination in evolution: 1) random mutation, and 2) Lamarckism ( 1–7 ). “Random mutation” does not mean simply that mutation is nondeterministic, nor that the prob-abilities of mutation origination are uniform across the genome. Rather, it means that mutation is accidental: that the causes of any particular mutation are unrelated to its biological conse-2quences ( 4, 5 ). Lamarckism, instead, assumes that the organism can somehow sense its im-mediate environment and respond directly to it with beneficial heritable change ( 8). However, Lamarckism requires “reverse engineering” ( 6) of an unintuitive kind, similar to reversing a one-way function ( 9, 10 ), and has been largely rejected ( 4, 5, 7, 11, 12 ). The lack of conceptual alternatives at the fundamental level until recently can be further clarified. Suppose that a random mutation occurs in a DNA-repair protein, changes the average mutation rate across many loci, and is favored by selection. Although this could hypotheti-cally allow the average mutation rate to evolve adaptively ( 13–16 ), it leaves the causes of any particular mutation accidental ( 5). As Lenski and Mittler asserted: “A fundamental tenet of evolutionary biology is that mutations are random events,” where this randomness means that “the likelihood of any particular mutational event is independent of its specific value to the organism” ( 4). Recently, however, a new theory was proposed, called Interaction-based Evolution (IBE), according to which mutations are neither random nor Lamarckian ( 17–19 ). This theory holds that individual mutations as well as individual epigenetic changes are not random because their probabilities of origination depend on complex information in a biologically meaningful man-ner. However, they are also not Lamarckian, because the information they depend on does not arrive directly from the immediate environment; instead, it accumulates in the genome over generations. At each generation, heritable changes arise based on the internal information ac-cumulated thus far, and those that survive become a part of the information affecting future generations’ mutations. Accordingly, evolution is akin to a long-term learning process based on nonrandom, non-Lamarckian heritable changes at its core ( 17–19 ). Surprisingly, despite the fact that “random mutation” refers to the rates of individual mu-tations, and despite its centrality in evolutionary thinking ( 4, 5 ), mutation rates have long been measured only as averages across many genomic positions (e.g., 20–24). Recently, however, a method to measure the rates of individual mutations was developed ( 25 ). When this method was applied to a mutation that has served as a classic example of adaptation by random mutation and natural selection ( 26–29 )—the human hemoglobin S (HbS) mutation, which protects against 3malaria while causing sickle-cell anemia in homozygotes ( 26, 30–33 )—it was found that this mutation originates de novo significantly more frequently in the gene and population case where it is adaptive: in sub-Saharan Africans, who have been exposed to intense malarial pressure for many generations, compared to northern Europeans, who have not, and in the hemoglobin sub-unit beta gene, where it provides protection against malaria, compared to the same mutation in the hemoglobin subunit delta gene, which does not ( 25 ). In other words, instead of origi-nating with a probability unrelated to its usefulness and only then being favored by selection where it is adaptive, this mutation arises in the first place de novo more frequently where it is needed ( 25 ). In the second study of this kind, similar results were obtained for another mutation (the human APOL1 1024 A →G mutation), protective against the most common form of human African sleeping sickness ( 34 ). These results cannot be explained by previous models in evo-lutionary theory, because these models do not apply to the rates of individual DNA mutations. 1

Instead, the results support IBE, which holds that mutation origination at the mutation-specific level responds to information accumulated in the genome over generations ( 17–19 ). Modeling IBE realistically would be challenging. However, it is conceptually informative to examine estimation-of-distribution algorithms (EDAs) from an IBE perspective. In EDAs, a sample of possible solutions to a complex problem is generated; the better solutions in the sam-ple are identified; a distribution from which these better solutions could have been drawn is esti-mated; this distribution is used to generate the next sample; and this procedure is repeated until a satisfactory solution is found (e.g., 38–49). Here we show that multivariate EDAs—EDAs which allow for dependencies between variables 2, i.e., for interactions between genes (e.g., 40, 41, 43–48)—demonstrate in an abstract and indirect manner nonrandom, non-Lamarckian mutation. In particular, the model shows that nonrandom, non-Lamarckian mutations are nat-ural: the key operator of the Restricted Boltzmann Machine which we use to generate the distribution ( 54, 55 ), which represents a kind of Hebbian learning ( 56, 57 ), is analogous in the  

> 1As modifier theory shows, because mutation rates are low, for a mutation to increase the mutation rate and be favored for this effect by selection, it must increase the average mutation rate across many genomic positions, so that many mutations potentially induced by it would figure into its selective benefit ( 16, 35–37 ).
> 2For our purposes, it is convenient to divide EDAs into two kinds: univariate and multivariate ones. The former do not allow for interactions between genes, whereas the latter do. Because bivariate EDAs allow for such interactions, we include them in the latter ( 50,51 ), even though they have also been commonly defined as a separate category ( 52, 53 ).

4abstract to actual biological mutational mechanisms for which evidence exists ( 19, 58 ). Despite their long-standing contributions to evolutionary theory, analytical population ge-netic models of the classical form ( 2, 59–61 ) cannot answer the basic question of whether se-lection of random mutations, random genetic drift, recombination, etc., could account for the adaptive complexity of life given the amount of time that has been available for evolution, partly because they do not include a representation of the phenotype—of complex biological structure. 3 Precisely in order to answer this question, Valiant introduced structure and means of analyzing complexity into evolutionary modeling by using the tools of theoretical computer science—specifically the “probably approximately correct” (PAC) learning framework ( 62 ). In constructing his model, however, he followed the traditional dichotomy of random mutation vs. Lamarckism. Excluding the latter, he obtained that evolution is equivalent to a restricted form of Statistical Query (SQ) learning ( 63 )—a process not obviously powerful enough to ex-plain the evolution of life with—and argued that his model offered a unifying framework for evolution and cognition ( 62 ). However, as we demonstrate here, it is when mutations are nei-ther random nor Lamarckian that mutational mechanisms become analogous to operators of cognition ( 18, 19 ), bringing evolution and cognition much closer together. Despite its abstract nature and differences from IBE, the model already captures indirectly several aspects of IBE, including that evolution is driven by the interaction of parsimony (sim-plification pressure) and fit ( 18, 19 ); that the fundamental elements of evolution—mutation, recombination and selection—interact in a complementary fashion ( 17 ); that random bits need not encode improvement directly but can enable generalization instead ( 64 ); and that improve-ment comes together with uniformity ( 17, 18 )—the last of which offers a new angle on Dar-win’s puzzling observations that changed conditions lead to increased production of heritable variation ( 65 ). Furthermore, while the bell-shaped distributions commonly observed in na-ture for continuous traits have been explained by the assumption of additive effects of multiple genes ( 66, 67 ), the results show that this shape can also be approximately obtained from a com-plex function where genes interact, and that its range of variation can be maintained for multiple    

> 3If evolution is based on random mutation and natural selection (rm/ns), then evidently time was sufficient for rm/ns to bring about life, but then rm/ns is taken as an assumption and is not mathematically justified.

5generations under selection by a mechanism different than previously assumed ( 68 ). Thus, the model points at a new direction for mathematical research on how to reconcile Darwinism and Mendelism in a manner that incorporates mutational mechanisms and reflects the central role of genetic interactions in biological evolution. Opening up new possibilities for thinking about how evolution happens is important for both evolution and computer science. For example, the mixability theory for the role of sexual recombination in evolution ( 64, 69–72 ) has served as a source of motivation for the develop-ment of “dropout” ( 73 )—a regularization technique recognized as one of the breakthroughs that helped launch the deep-learning revolution (ref. 74, p. 440). IBE shares multiple elements with mixability theory: the ideas that selection acts on complex wholes, that sexual recombination is not as a “bonus” but a fundamental element of evolution, that the breaking down of genetic combinations is “a feature, not a bug,” and the importance of simplification and generalization in evolution ( 64, 69–72 ). However, because IBE involves also the role of mutation ( 17–19 ), it is conceptually broader, and thus may serve as an additional source of motivation for interdis-ciplinary developments. Our goal, therefore, is a pedagogical one. The results are not meant to provide a better analysis of EDAs in terms of convergence, runtime or comparisons to other algorithms and are not surprising from an EDA perspective (see, e.g., 50–52,75,76). Our simulation does not model biological mechanisms of mutation realistically nor does it outperform preexisting evolutionary algorithms (e.g., 48, 77–79). Rather, our goal is to demonstrate that the traditional dichotomy of random mutation vs. Lamarckism is false, that the assumption of random mutation made throughout evolutionary theory is a contingent modeling choice, not a necessity, and that the concept of nonrandom, non-Lamarckian mutation is a logically coherent alternative. This forms a new bridge between the evolutionary biology and evolutionary computation literatures, shows that concepts of IBE can be explored mathematically, and points at new directions for research in evolutionary theory, evolutionary computation and machine learning. Indeed, it highlights that a new way of thinking about how biological evolution happens is possible ( 17–19 ). 62 Conceptual Overview: Interaction-based Evolution 

Three basic points of IBE are as follows. a) Sexual recombination, natural selection, and non-random, non-Lamarckian mutation interact in a complementary fashion ( 17 ). b) Evolution is driven by the interaction of parsimony and fit ( 18 ). c) Given nonrandom, non-Lamarckian mutation, the gradual process of the evolution of regulation leads to punctuated mutational change ( 19 ). We briefly review these points and provide an empirical example in the following sections. 

# 2.1 The interaction between the basic elements of evolution 

Three fundamental open problems in evolution have been as follows: What is the role of sex in evolution? How can complex adaptations evolve under natural selection? What is the funda-mental nature of mutation? ( 17 ). These problems have been considered largely separate from each other in standard evolutionary theory ( 2,7,59,80,81 ). However, IBE holds that they reflect inseparable aspects of one and the same process ( 17 ). It is convenient to begin with the problem of sex. Sexual reproduction requires highly com-plex adaptations as well as time and energy investment across the scales of organization—from the complex molecular machinery of meiosis to flowering and animal behavior. Yet despite these costs, species in which individuals do not exchange genetic material in any form or man-ner appear not to last over evolutionary time ( 82–85 ). These observations raise the following question: What makes sexual reproduction putatively necessary for long-term evolution? A common intuition has been that the role of sex in evolution must be to generate a vast number of different combinations of genes. Because genetic variation is the “fuel” for natural selection, it is thought that this variation must speed up evolution. However, precisely how it may speed up evolution has been unclear ( 81, 86–88 ). In particular, sexual recombination cannot simply enable selection to favor the best particular genetic combinations among many, because it also breaks down the complex combinations that it generates ( 10, 81, 86, 87 ). 4

> 4For this reason, evolutionary theoreticians traditionally have been looking for other solutions to the problem of sex. Some of these proposed solutions do not consider genetic interactions to be important at all ( 2, 89 ), while others consider them important only in a narrow sense (e.g., arguing that rare genetic combinations escape common parasites and thus it is beneficial to keep regenerating them [90, 91]).

7According to IBE, this original intuition has been incomplete. IBE holds that heritable change integrates information ( 17–19, 34 ). Therefore, although complex genetic combinations are constantly broken down by sexual recombination, information from these combinations as complex wholes is transmitted to future generations through the heritable changes that are derived from them (Figure 1). Interaction 

A B C

> Heritable change

A) B) 

> Gene product and/or sequence features Gene product and/or sequence features Gene product and/or sequence features

A B* C

a

b

Figure 1: The origination of heritable change is influenced by fan-in of heritable information, according to the theory of interaction-based evolution (image from ref. 19; see also ref. 17). 

a) Gene products as well as genetic sequences arising from or residing at multiple recombining loci interact in influencing the origination of a heritable change, whether a DNA mutation or an epigenetic change. In this schematic figure, this coming together of information leads to a new mutation, B*. b) As a result, even though the genes involved in the interaction may be separated by sexual recombination, the combination that they once were does have a heritable effect on future generations through the heritable change that was derived from it (B*). For simplicity, only three loci are presented, though in reality many loci can be involved in an interaction, directly or indirectly. This recognition offers a new conceptual framework for the workings of evolution: sexual recombination generates a vast number of different transient combinations of genes, natural selection acts on these transient combinations as complex wholes, and information is trans-mitted from these combinations as complex wholes to future generations through the heritable changes that are derived from them. The probability of transmission accords precisely with the combinations’ fitnesses ( 17 ). Furthermore, the fact that the outcome of a heritable change event in one generation be-comes a part of the genetic and epigenetic information that affects the probabilities of future 8heritable changes leads to a network of information flow and “computation” 5 across the genome and through the generations, where information flows from many genes into any one gene and from many ancestors into any one descendant (Figure 2). A B C D E F G A B C D E F G

Figure 2: The fan-in of information in the generation of heritable change enables a network of information flow across the genome and through the generations (image from ref. 17). Each box represents an individual. The large boxes represent two parents (top) and their offspring. The two dashed lines at the top of each large box represent the individual’s diploid genome (each pair of dashes represents a diploid locus), and the dashed line at the bottom represents the haploid genome of a gamete that is transferred to the next generation. The figure demonstrates schematically that an output of a heritable change event at one generation (e.g., C*) can serve as an input into heritable change events at later generations (D*). This connectedness generates a network of information flow across the genome and through the generations ( 17 ). 

# 2.2 Evolution driven by parsimony and fit 

What can mutation “compute” if no sensing of the immediate environment is allowed—if Lamarckism is excluded? Under traditional theory, evolution is driven by a single force—that of natural selection. In contrast, according to IBE, evolution is driven by the interaction of two forces—the external force of natural selection, and an internal force of natural simplification. The former represents differential survival and reproduction, and the latter represents nonrandom, non-Lamarckian 

> 5We place “computation” in quotations because, despite the simple simulation to be presented here, biological evolution is not a single algorithm devised to solve a particular computational task.

9heritable change ( 18, 19, 34 ). While the internal force enables simplification as well as duplica-tion of heritable information ( 19 ), the external force ensures that processes are only simplified to the extent that they keep functioning ( 18 ). According to IBE, this interaction of parsimony and fit generates elements that not only perform better but also have the inherent capacity to come together with other such elements into emergent, useful interactions at the system level ( 18 ). In other words, the interaction between parsimony and fit underlies the creativity of evolu-tion ( 18, 19 ). This view addresses multiple fundamental questions. First, as to what mutations could do except for “try changes at random,” local simplification of internal information does not require “knowledge” of organismal fitness the way natural selection or Lamarckism do ( 18 ): parsimony and fit interact in a complementary fashion—they do not overlap. Second, it addresses from a new angle the fundamental question of how biological complex-ity arises. By arguing that simplification under performance pressure generates from preexisting interactions new elements that have the inherent capacity to engage in emergent interactions— unexpected, useful interactions at the system level—IBE suggests that simplification is key to complexity ( 18, 19, 58 ). Notably, “co-option”—the phenomenon whereby a trait serving one role later in evolu-tion becomes useful for another role—is ubiquitous across the scales of biological organiza-tion ( 92–98 ), and has been considered key to the emergence of complexity ( 93–95, 97–100 ). Like mutation, co-option has been thought to be accidental in standard evolutionary theory (84, 92, 101 ). However, according to IBE, both mutation and co-option have causes, and their causes are interrelated ( 18 ): mutation embodies simplification, and simplification, together with selection, enables co-option ( 18 ). 

# 2.3 The empirical nature of mutation and the connection between gradual evolution and punctuated mutational change 

IBE’s third point connects the gradual process of the evolution of regulation with punctuated mutational change, thus addressing the HbS and other mutations’ origination rates mentioned earlier ( 19, 25, 34, 58 ). It holds that, starting from genetic variation initially co-opted from 10 previous processes, under selection, evolution gradually focuses on the genomic regions and the particular regulatory interactions most relevant for the currently evolving adaptations— interactions from which large-effect mutations follow directly via mutational mechanisms ( 19, 25, 34 ). Thus, adaptive mutations like the HbS or APOL1 1024A →G ones need not initiate a process of adaptation nor originate at random: they follow mechanistically from preexisting genetic interactions that have already evolved ( 19, 34 ). This means that the gradual and flexible process of adaptive evolution of regulation, which involves many changes of small effect, paves the way to evolutionarily punctuated, structural mutational changes of large effect. This point connects between continuous and discrete evolutionary change ( 19, 34 ). 

# 2.4 An empirical example demonstrating principles of IBE 

Mutations come in various forms—not only the “single-letter” changes called point mutations but also duplications, deletions, translocations, inversions and fusions of genetic sequences. (96 ). As for all mutation types, it has been thought that fusion mutations are random—that one day, a sequence is translocated by chance to another genomic locus, where by chance it may connect to a local sequence and form a new beneficial fusion gene. However, a recent study found that genes do not fuse at random ( 58 ). Instead, genes that are used together re-peatedly over the generations are the ones more likely to become fused together by mutational mechanisms based on their interaction ( 58 ). Mechanistically, it is known that when two remote genes work together, the DNA bends in 3D space, bringing them together to the same place at the same time in the nucleus with their chromatin open ( 102–106 ). It is thus easy to see that reverse transcription of RNA, recombination-based mechanisms and other mechanisms may specifically fuse such genes rather than others ( 18, 107 ). Recent evidence supports this proposal ( 58 ). An analogy can now be made between the gene fusion mechanism and the workings of the brain, where, on the microscale, “neurons that fire together wire together” (Hebbian learning) (56,57 ), and, on the macroscale, pieces of information that are commonly used together become chunked or “routinized” into a single piece that is thereafter activated as one (this is one of the 11 most basic principles of cognition and learning, called “chunking”) ( 108, 109 ). 6 Thus, not only are gene fusion mutations nonrandom, their mechanism of origination is actually analogous to one of the most basic principles of cognition and learning by the brain. Similarly to how the chunks generated by learning simplify processes and free up the brain to learn more complex patterns, gene fusion represents local regulatory simplification, and can facilitate evolution. Gene fusion does not lead to ever more simplicity and diminution of the genome; on the contrary. Because it is often preceded by or occurs simultaneously with du-plication of the source copies, it often leads in the long term not from two genes to one but from two genes to three ( 18, 58 ). This exemplifies the IBE principle that simplification is key to complexity: local regulatory simplification under selection, together with gene duplication, leads to a global increase in complexity ( 18, 19 ). The gene fusion mutational mechanism demonstrates that the probability of a mutational event is mutation specific (each pair of genes has its own fusion rate) and is affected by com-plex information accumulated in the genome over generations, including all of the enhancers, promoters, transcription factors, epigenetic marks etc. across loci that regulate the two genes and determine the strength of the interaction between them. It follows that a large-effect, struc-tural mutation can follow directly and mechanistically from a gradual process of evolution of regulation, such as the gradual tightening of the interaction between two genes ( 19, 34, 58 ). It has been proposed that, not only for gene fusion mutations, but across mutation types, mutation rates are mutation-specific and dependent on pre-evolved information in a biologically meaningful manner, and that mutational mechanisms put together different pieces of heritable information and simplify evolved regulatory phenomena ( 19 ). 

# 3 General overview of the simulation 

Modeling IBE realistically is a challenging task for future research. Here, we point out that the multivariate EDA framework captures nonrandom, non-Lamarckian mutation and certain other 

> 6For example, when we first learn to drive a manual car, switching gears requires conscious effort to coordinate different movements. However, in the course of learning, movements that repeatedly co-occur become chunked, allowing the gears to be shifted automatically and freeing the brain to learn higher-level tasks.

12 aspects of IBE in an abstract and indirect manner. In our EDA model, a Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) ( 54, 55 ) brings together infor-mation from the genomes of all individuals at each generation, representing at an abstract level the interaction between sexual recombination and nonrandom, non-Lamarckian mutation. Ob-viously, this use of the RBM is unrealistic. IBE does not hold that information comes together from all individuals at once per generation, nor that mutation and recombination can be literally represented by an RBM. We use the RBM as a generic representation of statistical learning, not as a claim about specific biological mechanisms, and its simultaneous pooling of information is a rudimentary stand-in for more natural forms of recombination and mutation that may be modelled in the future. The simulation comprises an adaptational problem to be approximately solved by the evo-lution of a population of constant size of N genomes per generation. Each genome is a possible solution to the adaptational problem and is assigned a fitness score based on its quality as such a solution. At each generation, threshold selection is applied, such that a certain top percentage (e.g., top 50%) of the population survive. The surviving individuals reproduce with change to provide the next generation of N genomes. The simulation starts with randomly produced genomes, and, over the generations, the average fitness in the population increases, as expected from standard models. The difference from basic genetic algorithms (GAs) and standard evolutionary models ( 2, 59–61,110–113 ) is in how individuals reproduce with change. At each generation, all surviving genomes are used to train a machine learning (ML) model, allowing it to learn the underlying distribution of such genomes. Next, N new individuals are sampled from the model to form the next generation. The process repeats itself for a predetermined number of generations, and the fitnesses of the individuals are recorded over the generations (Figure 3). As the ML component, we used here an RBM ( 48, 77, 114–118 ),though other options are possible (e.g., 47, 119–121). The use of this multivariate EDA framework reflects a key difference between IBE and previous evolutionary thinking. In the latter, there is no internal fan-in of information—no coming together of separate pieces of information found at different recombining loci in the 13 genome and in different individuals by mutation. Any computational integration of information can only occur through natural selection as it evaluates the phenotype. In contrast, at the core of our simulation, there is such internal fan-in, represented by the ML component—in principle, albeit not in realistic detail, in accord with IBE ( 17, 18 ). 

# 3.1 How the simulation captures IBE principles 

The model demonstrates heritable change that is neither random nor Lamarckian. It is not ran-dom, because new genomes are produced as a result of computation done on previous genomes. It is not Lamarckian, because the RBM cannot sense the environment or respond to it. Indeed, the RBM is not exposed to the selection function. It can only operate on internal information in the genomes of individuals. Despite this abstract manner of modeling, we can already see that the heritable change rep-resented by the RBM is actually natural in a critical sense. This can be seen by the analogy between the internal workings of the RBM and the biological gene fusion mutational mecha-nism mentioned earlier. In Boltzmann Machines, units that are used together are more likely to have the connection between them strengthened. In biological evolution, genes that are used together are more likely to become fused together. 7 Though more detail at the molecular level may become known in the future, the analogy can already be made at an abstract level and demonstrates that the mechanisms of nonrandom, non-Lamarckian heritable change are natu-ral: they are local, with fan-in, and supported by empirical evidence ( 19 ). In the sense that recombination brings information from separate surviving genomes into one, the EDA framework captures the idea of sexual recombination at a high level (Figure 3). Indeed, EDAs have been classified under “recombination-based search methods” ( 122 ). In ad-dition, in the multivariate case, the EDA framework captures the IBE principle of an interaction between sexual recombination and nonrandom, non-Lamarckian mutation, in that the internal fan-in through the RBM enables the coming together of information from different genes and 

> 7While in the RBM there are no direct connections between visible units, indirect connections via hidden units can be strengthened. The difference between fusion of units and the strengthening of connections between them is also mild for our current pedagogical purpose ( 18 ): as one example, it has been argued that genes that are used together are not only more likely to become fused together but also to be translocated closer to each other, long before they become fused ( 58 ), indicating a more gradual evolutionary process.

14 Basic EA 

> Top performer
> Random changes to
> the top performer
> Random changes to
> the top performer
> Generation 1
> Generation 2
> Generation 3

## a Multivariate EDA model 

of nonrandom mutation 

> ML (e.g. RBM)
> ML (e.g. RBM)
> Top performers

## b𝑣 ଵ 𝑣 ଶ 𝑣 ଷ               

> ℎଵℎଶℎଷℎସ
> 𝑎 ଵ𝑎 ଶ𝑎 ଷ
> 𝑏 ଵ𝑏 ଶ𝑏 ଷ𝑏 ସ
> 𝑣 ௜∈0,1
> ℎ௝∈0,1
> 𝑤 ௜,௝,𝑎 ௜,𝑏 ௝∈ ℝ

## c  

> ℎହℎ଺
> 𝑏 ହ𝑏 ଺

RBM Figure 3: A comparison between basic evolutionary algorithms (EAs) and the RBM-based EDA model described here. a) A schematic diagram of a basic evolutionary algorithm. At each generation, the top performer is selected and produces the next generation via self-replication and random changes representing mutations. b) A schematic diagram of the RBM-based EDA model. At each generation, a certain percentage of top performers is selected. Indirectly rep-resenting sexual recombination and nonrandom, non-Lamarckian mutation, an RBM is trained on the genomes of these top performers and, following training, is used to produce the next generation. c) An example of a Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) with three visible units 

vi, six hidden units hj , 18 weights wi,j between them, and nine biases in total for visible ( ai) and hidden ( bj ) units. In the simulations to follow, the number of visible units equals the genome length, which can be much larger than three. During training, the genomes of the surviving individuals are fed one by one into the visible units, and the weights and biases are adjusted accordingly (see Section 4 for details). 15 different ancestors into any one gene and any one descendant (Figure 2). 

# 4 Details of the simulation 

# 4.1 Boltzmann Machines, Hebbian learning, and the used-together-fused-together principle 

A Boltzmann Machine (BM) ( 123, 124 ) is a network that can be used, among other things, to form an implicit estimate of the probability distribution underlying a sample and then generate more data points from this estimated distribution. At each point in time, each of the units in the network can be either in an on (1) or in an off (0) state, and these states are updated asynchronously based on the states of other nodes in the network at the last time point. Let 

∆Ek = X

> i

wki si − bk, (1) where wki is the weight of the bidirectional connection between nodes k and i (wki = wik ), si

is the state of node i, and bk is a bias term. In the probabilistic setting ( 123 ), at each time point, a node k is chosen at random with replacement, and its state sk is updated to 1 with probability 

pk = 11 + e−∆Ek /T , (2) where T is a “temperature” parameter, and otherwise is set to 0. Adding a unit that is constitu-tively on and whose connection to node k has the value −bk simplifies equation 1 to 

∆Ek = X

> i

wki si, (3) showing that the bias can be updated like any other connection weight by the training algorithm, as discussed below. The network consists of visible units, which serve as the input/output interface, and hidden units. During training, the different data points are fed into the visible units, each data point being a binary vector Xj ∈ { 0, 1}n, and, after training, the network is allowed to run freely and generate data points on the visible units in accord with the generative model learned. During training, the network is run in two different modes: In the clamped mode, the visible units are temporarily fixed to the values of a point in accord with its probability, and the network 16 states are allowed to reach an equilibrium in accord with an annealing schedule, where the temperature is gradually reduced. In the free-running mode, random values are fed into the visible units, and these values are allowed to change while the network is allowed to reach an equilibrium. For each pair of units {i, j }, the probabilities of both units being on at the same time across equilibria in the clamped mode, denoted pij , and in the free-running mode, denoted 

p′ 

> ij

, are calculated, and the weight of the connection between the units is adjusted according to the following rule: 

∆wij = ηT (pij − p′ 

> ij

), (4) where η is the learning rate parameter. In other words: if units tend to be on together at the same time at equilibrium, the regulatory connection between them is strengthened, making them activate each other more strongly in the future. This represents Hebbian learning—units that “fire together wire together” ( 56,57 )—and is conceptually related to the gene fusion mechanism described earlier ( 58 ). This operation represents local change with fan-in. Though it depends only on the two nodes it connects, this suffices to enable a form of simplification: the complex causes of the correlation between two nodes are gradually replaced with a local, simpler connection. Finally, note that the connection is strengthened more the farther the correlation between i and j in the clamped mode is from that correlation in the free-running mode. Weights are adjusted in this manner until the discrepancy between the empirical distribution of examples and the generated distribution of examples, 

> X
> α

P (Vα) log P (Vα)

P ′(Vα) ,

is sufficiently small, where P (Vα) and P ′(Vα) are the probabilities of the visible nodes being at state Vα in the clamped and free-running states respectively (for detail, see refs. 123, 125). A Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) ( 54,55 ) is a simple form of BM that can be trained and executed much faster. In the RBM, edges between two hidden units as well as edges be-tween two visible units are excluded, resulting in a single layer of visible nodes and a single layer of hidden nodes. Thus, fewer calculations are needed, and these calculations can be done 17 in parallel. Furthermore, convergence and annealing are not used; instead, the weights are updated for a predetermined number of iterations, which is a model parameter (see below). A basic training approach for the RBM, called Contrastive Divergence (CD-k) ( 55 ), operates as follows. In the clamped mode, the states of hidden units are calculated only once, and the states of all units are noted. In the free-running mode, one may begin with random values or zeros in one of the layers, then calculate the states of the other layer, and next calculate the new states of the first layer. After a small number k of such cycles, called “Gibbs steps,” the states of all units are noted. Based on the states noted in the two modes for all input vectors used, pij and 

p′ 

> ij

are calculated, and the weights of the connections between the layers are updated as before (equation 4). Each computational cycle resulting in weights update is called “an iteration.” Here we use the RBM model with the scikit-learn implementation ( 126 ), which employs the Persistent Contrastive Divergence (PCD) method ( 127 ). PCD builds upon the CD-k approach, where, moving from one iteration to the next, the states in the free-running mode are not initial-ized, but instead the calculation continues from the states of the previous iteration ( 127, 128 ). It has been suggested that PCD is more efficient than CD-k ( 127 ). Notice that, while the training of BMs normally begins with zero weights ( 123 ) or with random weights in the range [−1, 1] 

(ref. 125, p. 191), in the scikit-learn implementation, the weights and biases are initially sam-pled from the normal distribution N (0 , 0.01 2) and are then updated as described above. As recommended ( 129 ), we divide the input vectors into sets of equal size, called mini-batches. For each batch, we run the number of iterations specified and then continue to update the weights with the next batch. The number of hidden units, the learning rate, the number of iterations and the batch size are model parameters. Following training, we use the free-running state of the RBM to generate vectors that accord with the rules discovered. To generate each new vector, we place a random binary value at each of the visible units ( 0 or 1 with equal probability), run the RBM at a free state for a specified number of iterations and obtain the new vector at the visible nodes. 18 4.2 Adaptational challenge and fitness values 

To generate complex adaptive landscapes, we use the well-known MAX-SAT problem ( 130 ), for which the performances of different EDAs have been compared before ( 48 ). In MAX-SAT, a Boolean formula in conjunctive normal form (CNF) is given, e.g., ϕ = ( x1 ∨ x2) ∧ (x1 ∨ x2 ∨

x3) ∧ (x1 ∨ x2 ∨ x3) ∧ (x2 ∨ x3), and one must find an assignment to the xi that maximizes the number of clauses that are satisfied. For example, the assignment x1 = 1 , x2 = 0 and x3 = 1 

satisfies all 4 clauses in ϕ. When all clauses in formula Φ are of size k, we call Φ a MAX-k-SAT instance. Consider a haploid genome of n loci, carrying at each locus one of two alleles, 0 or 1.Let fitness be a binary function fΦ : {0, 1}n → [0 , 1] , which, for genome i, Xi ∈ { 0, 1}n,provides the fraction of clauses in formula Φ that Xi satisfies. In other words, each individual genome offers a solution to the MAX-SAT problem. While MAX-SAT is NP-hard, we will examine approximate solutions that are discovered in the course of two evolutionary processes: a random mutation and natural selection (rm/ns) process (RM), and an RBM-based, IBE-like process as described. 

# 4.3 The core of the simulation 

Consider a population of genomes Xi, i ∈ { 1, ..., N }, where N is even for convenience. At generation 0, all genomes are randomized such that each bit of each genome is either 0 or 1

with equal probability. At each generation, the fitnesses of all individuals are calculated. In the IBE-like case, a top percentage (e.g., 50% ) of the population survives. An RBM with n visible units is then trained on the surviving individuals as explained above, and is then run in a free state to generate all N

individuals of the next generation. In the rm/ns case, a certain percentage or number of top performing individuals survive. To generate each of the N individuals of the next generation, a surviving parent is chosen at random with replacement, a copy of its genome is made, and, to simulate mutation, a specified number of bits in this copy are chosen at random with uniform probability and flipped. 19 The population mean fitness, ¯w, is calculated at each generation before selection, to avoid bias due to the percentage of surviving individuals parameter. Note that the population size N , genome size n and fitness function fΦ parameters are shared between the models. The number of hidden units h, the number of iterations T , the batch size 

B, the learning rate η and the RBM number or percentage of surviving individuals SRBM are specific to the RBM model, while the number of bits mutated per individual per generation μ

and the RM number or percentage of surviving individuals SRM are specific to the RM model. In addition to the RM and RBM models, a third, basic model called Best Random Guess (BRG) is run. This model generates N random genomes of size n at each generation and stores in memory the genome with the highest fitness value observed up to that generation. It demonstrates the solution quality that can be reached by repeated pure guessing. 

# 4.4 Problems used 

a) Uniform Random k-SAT Instances: The random k-SAT generator ( 131 ) was used to create uniform random MAX-k-SAT instances with k = 3 , different numbers of variables n ranging from 75 to 2400 and a clause-to-variable ratio of 4.267 . For each n, the tool randomly selects three variables from the set of n variables and their negations, repeating this process n · 4.267 

times, rounded up to the nearest integer, while ensuring that, within each clause, all variables are distinct, and that all clauses are distinct from each other. 

b) Even Boolean Parity Functions: As discussed below, to examine whether the RBM uses information on interactions between genes—whether it determines the genetic content at one genomic locus based on another—we used even-parity Boolean functions. An even-parity func-tion outputs 1 when the number of ones among its Boolean variables is even, and 0 otherwise. These functions have known satisfying assignments which are distinct from each other. For ex-ample, the two-variable even-parity problem has two satisfying assignments: (0 , 0) and (1 , 1) .We used even-parity Boolean functions with 2–5 variables. 20 4.5 Parameter choice 

To enable a meaningful comparison of the performances of the two evolutionary models in the adaptational challenge, for each setting of the shared parameters, we run each model with its best tested model-specific parameters. Because the underlying question is whether nonrandom, non-Lamarckian mutational mechanisms are possible in principle, the RBM is provided as much computational power as needed within the limit of the computational resources available for the study. Allowing each model its best parameters is conservative for our purposes. In standard evo-lutionary theory, the rate of random mutation does not adjust itself to any particular combination of population size, genome size and adaptational challenge. Therefore, the optimal choice of the random mutation rate per shared parameter setting makes the RM model far more powerful than expected from standard theory. In contrast, according to IBE, mutational and recombinational mechanisms evolve in an ongoing manner and, although it is beyond the scope of the present work to model their own evolution, they are expected to fit the evolution of current adaptations. Given that our simulation allows each model to run with its best parameters, the fact that the evolution of the mutation rate is expected to be severely restricted from the perspective of tradi-tional theory, whereas mechanisms of mutation and recombination are expected to continually evolve from the perspective of IBE, makes this comparison conservative in principle. To ensure that it is conservative in practice, however, it is also crucial to test that the param-eter range scanned in order to optimize the RM model is a reasonable one. For this purpose, we have investigated trends in the RM model for the six MAX-3-SAT examples described above using various population sizes, percentages of surviving individuals and numbers of mutations per individual per generation: 1. Population size, N : 1, 10 , 100 , 1000 , 10000 , 100000 .2. Percentage of surviving individuals, SRM : 1% , 5% , 10% , 50% and 1 individual. 3. Number of mutations per generation, μ: 1 − 5.All six MAX-3-SAT cases exhibit similar trends. As an example, Table 1 presents the 21 average fitness values of populations at generation 500 for a MAX-3-SAT problem with 1200 

variables and all possible combinations of the parameters described above. We can see that, first, for the given population sizes, which are the ones used in all of the simulations to follow, the optimal number of mutations per individual per generation varied from 1 to 4, suggesting that testing numbers of mutation larger than the ones tested in the simulations to follow is unnecessary. Second, the best results are typically observed when 1 individual, 1% or 5% of the population survives. More rarely, depending on the particular problem, for larger population sizes, a survival rate of 10% can outperform scenarios where only the best individual survives. This suggests that testing percentages of surviving individuals that are higher than tested in the simulations to follow is unnecessary. 22 Table 1: Population mean fitness values at generation 500 in the RM model for a MAX-3-SAT example with n = 1200 variables. Some cells are blank because, for the corresponding population size and percentage of surviving individuals, either one or no individuals survive (if one individual survives, the results are presented in the top block of the table, and if no individual survives, the simulation cannot be run). In the first two rows, the results are better with μ = 2 than with μ = 1 for larger population sizes. The reason is that when only one individual survives, only n different individuals can be produced by flipping only a single bit in the genome per offspring. Therefore, increasing N beyond n will not improve the results—it will merely generate duplicate individuals—unless μ is increased as well. This kind of effect applies only when the number of surviving individuals is small relative to the population size, so that the initial variation from which the next generation is produced is small. At the same time, increasing the percentage of surviving individuals is typically detrimental for the RM model. population size, N → 2 10 100 1000 10000 

SRM μ

1 0.919 0.974 0.986 0.986 0.985 2 0.917 0.966 0.986 0.99 0.989 1 3 0.925 0.957 0.981 0.989 0.991 individual 4 0.925 0.947 0.976 0.987 0.991 5 0.927 0.948 0.973 0.984 0.989 1 0.989 0.99 2 0.99 0.993 1% 3 0.987 0.991 4 0.982 0.986 5 0.979 0.982 1 0.987 0.99 0.988 2 0.982 0.987 0.987 5% 3 0.979 0.98 0.982 4 0.968 0.972 0.977 5 0.965 0.97 0.971 1 0.981 0.988 0.988 2 0.976 0.98 0.983 10% 3 0.968 0.973 0.977 4 0.963 0.967 0.97 5 0.957 0.963 0.963 1 0.939 0.957 0.96 0.962 2 0.935 0.945 0.95 0.951 50% 3 0.929 0.936 0.943 0.943 4 0.923 0.933 0.936 0.937 5 0.92 0.927 0.93 0.931 23 5 Results 

# 5.1 Adaptive evolution with nonrandom, non-Lamarckian mutation 

We examined various MAX-SAT problem instances within the limits of the computational re-sources available, with different clause sizes, both fixed and variable, and different total num-bers of variables. As a typical example, Figure 4 shows three MAX-3-SAT instances with 150 ,

600 and 2400 variables. To construct this figure, for each model, we first evaluated all possible combinations of the parameters shown in Table 2 with the following exceptions. For the RM case, combinations with N = 10 and SRM < 10% were excluded because they allow less than 1 individual to survive. For the RBM case, combinations with less than 50 surviving individuals were excluded, because the RBM cannot be trained on insufficiently large datasets. For each model, we then found the parameter combinations that provided the highest population mean fitness at generations 50, 100 and 500 (up to three different parameter combinations—one for each of the three sampled generations) and, in the case of ties, picked one of the tied combi-nations at random. We then presented up to three curves for each model, one for each of the three best parameter combinations. To avoid the RM model being encumbered by a population too large to cross fitness valleys, for a given value NM AX , the population size N is itself an optimized parameter that is allowed to take any of the N values in the table that are smaller or equal to NM AX .24 Table 2: Parameters used in the RM and RBM models. Parameter RBM RM Problem 3-SAT 3-SAT Population size, N 100 , 1000 , 10000 2, 10 , 100 , 1000 , 10000 

Percentage of surviving individuals, 5% , 10% , 50% 1 individual, 1% ,

SRBM , S RM 5% , 10% , 50% 

Number of hidden nodes, H 1×, 2× problem size N/A Number of iterations, T 20 , 100 N/A Learning rate, η 0.00001 , 0.0001 , N/A 

0.001 , 0.01 , 0.05 

Batch size, B 10 , 100 , 1000 N/A 

B < N 

Number of mutations per individual per generation, μ N/A 1, 2, 3, 4, 5

As Figure 4a shows, adaptive evolution proceeds effectively in the RBM-based model, namely with heritable change that is neither random nor Lamarckian. In fact, ¯w becomes higher in the RBM model than in the RM model during the transient—i.e., following several (5–7) gen-erations and before plateauing (at about generation 400–500). This RBM advantage increases with the problem size and/or the population size, suggesting that the RBM-based model solves the optimization problem more effectively than the RM model under more realistic conditions. 25 1 2 30 100 200 300 400 500 0.9 0.95 10 100 200 300 400 500 0.9 0.95 10 100 200 300 400 500 0.9 0.95 10 100 200 300 400 500 0.9 0.95 10 100 200 300 400 500 0.9 0.95 10 100 200 300 400 500 0.9 0.95 10 100 200 300 400 500 0.9 0.95 10 100 200 300 400 500 0.9 0.95 10 100 200 300 400 500 0.9 0.95 10 10 20 30 40 50 0.9 0.95 10 10 20 30 40 50 0.9 0.95 10 10 20 30 40 50 0.9 0.95 10 10 20 30 40 50 0.9 0.95 10 10 20 30 40 50 0.9 0.95 10 10 20 30 40 50 0.9 0.95 10 10 20 30 40 50 0.9 0.95 10 10 20 30 40 50 0.9 0.95 10 10 20 30 40 50 0.9 0.95 1Figure 4: a) ¯w in the RBM (blue), RM (red) and BRG (grey) models for three MAX-3-SAT instances of 150 , 600 and 2400 variables (rows) and three maximum population sizes Nmax 

(columns). Generations are on the x-axis. The difference between the RBM and RM mean fitnesses increases with the population size as well as with the problem size. The BRG curve, which provides a baseline for comparison, starts higher than the other curves because it repre-sents not the mean fitness but the single highest fitness obtained up to the given generation by pure guessing. b) Zooming in on the first 50 generations. The RM model performs better during the first few generations, while the RBM model exhibits a rapid transition during the transient. 26 While the RM model performs better in the first few generations, the RBM model exhibits a rapid transition during the transient, with an inflection point in low population sizes and small problem instances. 

# 5.2 Genome completion test 

To ascertain that genes interact in the generation of heritable information, we took two ap-proaches. The first involves using the RBM to complete partially known genomes. In this approach, we clamp values (henceforth “known gene values”) to some of the visible units and run the RBM with these values fixed for T iterations. This procedure allows the remaining visi-ble unit activations (henceforth “inferred gene values”) to be inferred from the fixed ones based on the patterns learned from surviving genomes. We perform this procedure at each generation separately following the original simulation described in Section 4. Each set of known gene values comes from one individual, and all sets involve the same loci. After generating 100 com-pleted genomes, we generate the set of all possible shuffled genomes, each of which includes one known and one inferred set of genes, regardless of the original linkage between them, re-sulting in 100 ·99 2 = 4950 shuffled genomes in total. Finally, we compare the mean fitness of the inferred genomes to the mean fitness of the shuffled genomes. If the former is consistently larger, it would demonstrate that the inferred gene values match the known gene values—i.e., that information at one locus is generated based on information at other loci. A challenge to this method arises when using the uniform MAX-3-SAT instances because, by the time fitnesses in the population increase substantially, the genomes are already similar to each other, making the shuffled genomes similar to the original ones. Therefore, for a clearer comparison, we used problems with distinct and varied solutions based on even-parity Boolean functions with 2–5 variables (see Section 4.4). Although parity functions are biologically un-realistic because they exhibit no sense of modularity, we use them here not to demonstrate the ability of the RBM-based model but to demonstrate that it takes into account interactions be-tween genes in the generation of genetic information. For these parity function problems, let vectors with parity 1 have a fitness value of 1 and let all other vectors have a fitness value of 0.Note that the final bit of a correct solution is determined by the first n − 1 bits of the solution. 27 For example, in the 3-variable problem, if the first two bits are (1 , 0) , the last bit must be 1.In the simulations, we let the RBM complete the last bit of each of 100 vectors for even-parity Boolean functions of different sizes. Figure 5 illustrates the results for these parity problems across various population sizes when the known gene values are sampled from the population. The other way to demonstrate that genes interact in generating genetic information is to examine the internal workings of the RBM rather than treating it as a black box. Since biases represent separate effects of individual genes and connection weights represent genetic interac-tions, by comparing the impact of weights and biases, one can determine whether the RBM is able to recognize interactions between genes. For this purpose, we examine ¯w in three different models: (1) the original model with both weights and biases; (2) a weights-only model where biases are set to 0 and never updated; and (3) a biases-only model where weights are set to 0

and never updated. Figure 6 demonstrates results of these models for uniform random MAX-3-SAT instances with 75 (first row) and 1200 (second row) variables and different population sizes. We can see that for all considered combinations of parameters, the full and the weights-only models yield similar results, while the biases-only model yields substantially lower population mean fitnesses. 

# 5.3 The relation between selection and the amount of genetic variation produced 

According to standard evolutionary theory, an adaptation could hypothetically evolve that in-creases the average mutation rate when the individual senses stress ( 132–134 ). Such an adap-tation is considered to be an addition to rm/ns that could speed up the search for solutions by rm/ns when needed. However, there is no direct relationship between the direct pressure of natural selection on the population (differential survival and reproduction per se , as opposed to stress sensed by individuals) and the overall amount of genetic variation produced (as opposed to maintained). IBE, in contrast, is a different process, where uniformity across individuals evolves together with the adaptation ( 17, 18 ). Consistent with IBE, in the simulations above, the amount of genetic variation produced is 28 0 50 100 00.5 10 50 100 00.5 10 50 100 00.5 10 50 100 00.5 10 50 100 00.5 10 50 100 00.5 10 50 100 00.5 10 50 100 00.5 10 50 100 00.5 10 50 100 00.5 10 50 100 00.5 10 50 100 00.5 1Figure 5: ¯w over the generations in the genome completion test for even-parity Boolean func-tions with 2, 3, 4 and 5 variables, averaged over 100 independent runs. The known gene values are sampled from the population and the remaining gene value is completed by the RBM. The rows show results for functions of different numbers of variables, from n = 2 to n = 5 . The columns show results for different population sizes, from N = 10 2 to N = 10 6. The other parameters are B = 10 , T = 20 , H = n, η = 0 .1, SRBM = 50% ; the number of genomes to complete is 100 , and the length of the pattern to be completed is one position shorter than the genome length. The average fitness of the inferred genomes is shown by an orange line, and the average fitness of shuffled genomes is shown by a grey line. In the left column, the population size is generally too small to learn several different solutions, and therefore the shuf-fled genomes are identical to the inferred genomes. This effect disappears for larger population sizes, showing a gap in ¯w between the inferred and shuffled genomes, which implies that infor-mation at one locus is generated based on information at other loci. 29 0 50 100 0.9 0.95 10 50 100 0.9 0.95 10 50 100 0.9 0.95 10 50 100 0.9 0.95 10 50 100 0.9 0.95 10 50 100 0.9 0.95 1Figure 6: ¯w over the generations for two MAX-3-SAT instances ( 75 and 1200 variables) av-eraged over 100 independent runs for three different models: the full model (solid blue line), the weights-only model (dashed orange line) and the biases-only model (dashed green line). Results are shown for three different population sizes: N = 100 (left), N = 1000 (middle) and 

N = 10 , 000 (right). The other RBM parameters are B = 10 , SRBM = 50% , T = 20 , H = n

for both n values; η = 0 .01 for n = 75 and η = 0 .001 for n = 1200 . In the 75 variables case, for bigger population sizes, both biases and interactions in the generation of information in the genome contribute to fitness. In the 1200 variables case, the importance of interactions entirely dominates that of the biases. 30 automatically reduced over time as the population closes in on the solution to the adaptational problem. Uniformity between individuals arises together with improvement, as the internal accumulation of information modeling the outside world is restricting further mutations. Additionally, we tested whether the amount of genetic variation produced can be increased by changing the selective regime at different generations. As shown in Figure 7, following a change in natural selection, the amount of variation produced first increases and then decreases again as improvement comes. Notice that, although the change in the amount of variation produced may seem small, it is only small in comparison to the amount of variation in the first generation, which is artificial to begin with. 8

# 5.4 The bell-shaped distribution of continuous traits and the maintenance of variation under selection 

The bell-shaped distributions commonly observed in nature for continuous traits like height are attributed in standard evolutionary theory to additive functions of alleles across loci in accord with the Central Limit Theorem (CLT) ( 66,67 ). In our simulation of the MAX-SAT adaptational challenge, the variables interact in a complex manner, and therefore selection acts on genomes as complex wholes; yet the distribution of fitness values in the population is also bell-shaped. In addition, the range of phenotypic variation is maintained for multiple generations of selection. Figure 8 shows the distributions of fitness values for different generations in the RBM model for a MAX-3-SAT instance with n = 600 variables. The distributions are approximately bell-shaped and the mean increases over the generations. Thus, neither mutational randomness nor additivity of independent fitness contributions are necessary for the emergence of bell shaped distributions or for the increase in ¯w.

# 6 Discussion 

It is not surprising that the RBM-based model outperforms the random mutation one given previous results in EDAs ( 48, 77–79, 114–118 ). Rather, our goal has been to point out that multivariate EDAs instantiate a third category of heritable change: nonrandom, non-Lamarckian 

> 8In nature, there is no “generation zero” that begins with a maximal amount of variation generated at random.

31 1 2 3 4 50 100 0.9 0.95 1           

> 10 50 100 0.9 0.95 1
> 30 50 100 0.9 0.95 1
> 50 100 0.9 0.95 150 100 00.2 0.4
> 10 50 100 00.2 0.4
> 30 50 100 00.2 0.4
> 50 100 00.2 0.4

Figure 7: ¯w over time (left, blue) and the average expected heterozygosity, ¯He over time (right, red) in the RBM model, averaged over 100 independent runs, for MAX-3-SAT instances with 

n = 20 variables. Let He = 1 − p2 − q2, where p and q are frequencies of the two alleles, 0

and 1, in a given locus, with p + q = 1 , and let ¯He be the mean He across loci, serving here as a measure of genetic variation. The top two panels show the results of simulations where the same selection pressure is maintained from beginning to end. All other rows show the results of simulations where the selection pressure is changed at generation G from one MAX-3-SAT instance to another ( G = 10 , second row; G = 30 , third row; and G = 50 , bottom row). Other parameters are N = 100 , B = 10 , T = 20 , H = n, η = 0 .1, and SRBM = 50% .32 0.85 0.9 0.95 100.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1510 20 30 40 50 60 80 100 Generation 0.85 0.9 0.95 100.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 10.85 0.9 0.95 100.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1Figure 8: Distributions of the fitness values in the population at different generations in the RBM model for a MAX-3-SAT instance with n = 600 . Fitness values were distributed across 0.005-sized bins and the number of fitness values per bin was normalized by the population size, N . Different panels show results for different population sizes ( N = 100 , left; N = 1000 ,middle; and N = 10000 , right), and, in each panel, fitness distributions for different generations between 1 and 100 are shown based on the color chart. The parameters were selected to provide the highest tested ¯w as measured at generation 100 . Specifically, for N = 100 : B = 10 ,

SRBM = 50% , H = 2 n, T = 20 and η = 0 .01 . For N = 1000 : B = 10 , SRBM = 50% ,

H = 2 n, T = 100 and η = 0 .001 . For N = 10000 : B = 100 , SRBM = 10% , H = n, T = 100 

and η = 0 .01 .mutation. Indeed, such EDAs enable interactions between genes in the generation of heritable information. This shows that multivariate EDAs are natural in an important sense, clarifies that the IBE concept of nonrandom, non-Lamarckian mutation is logically coherent, and points at a new direction for theoretical research, as we will explain below. The results demonstrate that heritable change can be neither random nor Lamarckian as fol-lows: It is not random because it depends on information in a biologically meaningful manner. It is not Lamarckian because the information is internal and is accumulated in the genome over generations. In stark contrast with Lamarckism, selection remains the only source of feedback on the fit between the organism and its environment. In stark contrast with the notion of random mutation, mutation is fundamentally nonrandom. At the same time, the results demonstrate that the mechanisms of nonrandom, non-Lamarckian mutation can be natural in an important sense. As an example, an analogy exists between the Hebbian learning mechanism of adjustment of connection weights in Boltzmann Machines and the biological gene-fusion mutational mechanism described by Bolotin et al. ( 58 ). In accord with the former, units that “fire together wire together” ( 56, 57 ), and in accord with the latter, 33 genes that are used together are more likely to become fused together by mutational mecha-nisms ( 19, 58 ). Indeed, there is no “homunculus” inside the individual deciding on heritable changes in a centralized manner: mutations in a given gene depend on the genes interacting with that gene. Heritable change is local and influenced by a fan-in of information, allowing for decentralized integration of information over the generations. Despite its differences from IBE, the model already captures certain aspects of IBE indi-rectly: a) Sexual recombination, selection, and nonrandom, non-Lamarckian mutation interact in a complementary fashion ( 17 ). b) Evolution is driven by an interaction of simplification and fit ( 18 ). c) Selection on individuals as complex wholes is at the core of the adaptive evolu-tionary process ( 17, 18 ). d) Randomness does not generate improvements directly but rather enables generalization by the manner in which it is connected with the rest of the evolutionary process ( 64 ). e) Evolution takes place at the level of the population as a whole: an improvement arises not from a random mutation that originated in one individual and spread to the entire pop-ulation, but from internal simplification mechanisms that naturally integrate information over generations under selection from many surviving individuals ( 17, 18 ). Despite its lack of realism, the model offers a new angle on difficult biological problems. First, that improvement comes together with uniformity between individuals offers a theoreti-cal explanation for observations suggesting that selection per se can increase the production of genetic variation ( 65 ). Second, while it has been assumed that additive genetic effects explain the commonly observed bell-shaped distribution of continuous traits ( 66, 67 ), the results sug-gest that a bell-shaped distribution can also be obtained from a complex function where alleles interact across loci, and that genetic variation in the direction of selection can be replenished by nonrandom, non-Lamarckian mutation. These results point at a new direction for theoretical research: internal fan-in of information through heritable change needs to be incorporated both in evolutionary theory and in evolution-ary computation. While genetic algorithms (GAs) apply concrete mechanisms of recombination and mutation, these mechanisms have not incorporated true, general, internal fan-in of evolv-ing information; and while multivariate EDAs do have such integration of internal information, 34 they instantiate it in a manner that is highly abstract and indirect from a biological perspective. Future research is needed to find ways to combine concrete, natural operators of recombina-tion and mutation together with internal integration of information. Empirical observations of IBE ( 19, 34, 58 ) can serve as a source of inspiration for modeling such mechanisms of non-random, non-Lamarckian heritable change explicitly. Below, we elaborate on connections to evolutionary theory, computational learning theory, and other areas. 

# 6.1 The reconciliation between Darwinism and Mendelism revisited 

The role of sexual recombination has been problematic both in evolutionary theory and in evo-lutionary computation. The layperson’s intuition has been that sexual recombination generates a vast number of different combinations of genes, and that, because variation adds “fuel” for selection, this must speed up evolution. However, sexual recombination cannot make selection favor the best particular combinations among many because it constantly breaks down the com-binations it generates ( 10, 81, 86, 87 ). Therefore, standard evolutionary theory deviated from the layperson’s intuition in search of solutions of other types. 9 However, each such proposed solution required its own special conditions ( 88 ), in contrast to the prevalence of sex in nature, and all treated sexual recombination as an auxiliary process. 10 Relatedly, in the field of ge-netic algorithms (GAs), the problem of the breaking down of favorable combinations has been noted ( 52, 135, 136 ), even while it has been simultaneously assumed that recombination and selection should generate adaptive complexes ( 110–112 ). To move beyond this conceptual state of affairs, one must trace its roots back to the fun-damental problems in Darwin’s theory and how it was reconciled with Mendelism. In Dar-win’s theory, adaptive evolution resulted from selection acting on small but abundant variation existing among individuals in every generation, and proceeded gradually ( 137 ). Two funda-mental problems with this theory were the idea that sexual reproduction would obliterate any 

> 9As noted, in such solutions, alleles at different genes are selected separately ( 2, 89 ), or combinations of alleles at different loci play a role but only in a narrow sense (e.g., refs. 90, 91).
> 10 20 th -century theories on the role of sex in evolution have considered it a “bonus” that may speed up evolution under certain conditions but is not essential for evolution. As H. J. Muller wrote, “There is no basic biological reason why reproduction, variation and evolution can not go on indefinitely without sexuality or sex; therefore, sex is not, in an absolute sense, a necessity, it is a ‘luxury”’ ( 89 ).

35 heritable variation and prevent this variation from being favored by selection over generations (“blending inheritance”), and ignorance of how heritable variations arise ( 137 ). In a seeming contrast, Mendel’s finding that the shuffling of heritable factors (later called “genes”) through sexual recombination determined discrete traits such as the color of the peas (which could be either yellow or green) suggested that heritable information was discrete (“particulate”) ( 138 )and seemed to support the view that evolution progressed in discrete mutational leaps ( 137 ). Fisher proposed to reconcile Darwinian gradualism with Mendelian particulate inheritance by assuming that multiple genes can make separate, additive contributions to the same continuous trait ( 66 ). This assumption allowed beneficial alleles of discrete genes to spread simultaneously in a sexual population without disrupting each other ( 2, 89 ), and thus allowed continuous traits to evolve gradually over the generations under natural selection.At the same time, he assumed mutations to be accidental ( 2), avoiding Lamarckism in a manner which resonated with the view of genes as separate actors. This solution, however, which became foundational to 20 th -century evolutionary theory, has left fundamental problems open. First, it offered a framework under which sexual recombina-tion was not disruptive—which is not the same as explaining why a trait of such fundamental importance exists in the first place and what role it plays in evolution ( 10, 17 ). Second, it of-fered a model where a single numerical variable called “fitness” could additively increase over generations based on independent genetic contributions 11 (2)—which is not the same as show-ing how complex structure evolves ( 62 ). Indeed, the underlying assumption that genes make separate contributions to fitness has been criticized as paradoxical from a biological stand-point ( 141–143 ). IBE offers a different reconciliation based on recognizing the interaction of two forces in evolution—an internal and an external one ( 17–19, 25, 34, 58 ). Under this framework, as demonstrated here indirectly, sexual recombination generates individual genetic combinations as complex wholes, selection acts on these combinations as complex wholes, and nonrandom, non-Lamarckian heritable changes enable these complex wholes to have effects on future gener-

> 11 When genetic interactions affect the fitness in focus, a general increase in fitness in a sexual population cannot be properly demonstrated within the traditional framework ( 139, 140 ).

36 ations despite their transient nature, based on fan-in of information from multiple recombining loci ( 17 ). Thus, sexual recombination, natural selection and the empirical nature of heritable change are connected in a manner that captures the central role of interactions between genes. 

# 6.2 Heritable change integrates internal information 

As argued by IBE and demonstrated here using the multivariate EDA framework, the problem of sexual recombination is intrinsically linked to the problem of heritable change. In standard evolutionary theory, mutation is accidental: local change in the genome occurs in a manner unrelated to information at other genomic loci. In contrast, IBE holds that there is fan-in of information in the origination of heritable change. This changes how the fundamental elements of evolution—recombination, selection and mutation—interact. In standard theory, separate pieces of information inherited from different genomes merely sit together side by side tran-siently in the same genome until they are separated again, and therefore the breaking down of favorable combinations is a problem. In contrast, in our model, such pieces of information are actually combined and integrated through heritable change. Therefore, fit complex wholes have effects on future generations through these changes, and the constant breaking down of favorable combinations is not a problem—it is how things work. As is well known, putting together pieces of information is at the basis of computation, as seen in the operation of a Turing machine, a logical gate or a neuron. We claim that it is also at the basis of evolution (see also 17, 107), although using it here requires a conceptual change in what roles mutation and selection play and how they interact, 12 as discussed below. 

# 6.3 Parsimony and fit in biological evolution 

The action of the RBM can be seen as demonstrating local regulatory simplification: the ini-tially complex influences of the network on the correlation between the activations of a pair of units are replaced over time by the strengthening of a single, direct connection between these units. The principle of regulatory simplification accords not only with the used-together-

> 12 In addition, note that, more precisely, heritable changes parallel learning changes (such as Hebbian learning, which also requires fan-in from different neurons)—i.e., changes in the structure of the network, not computations that are a part of its day-to-day operation.

37 fused-together gene fusion mechanism ( 58 ): it has been argued that mutations of various types, including point mutations, deletions, translocations and fusions, naturally simplify and replace preexisting genetic interactions ( 19, 34 ). Indeed, that evolution is driven by an interaction between an external force of natural se-lection and an internal force of natural simplification, and that this interaction uncovers the commonalities between successful individuals, is a key principle of IBE ( 17, 18 ); and this prin-ciple is also seen in operation in the simulation. Because of selection, the information that is processed by the RBM is composed of genomes that survived and reproduced; and because of its simplifying action, the RBM identifies patterns of genetic interactions that are common among successful individuals. 

# 6.4 Changed conditions and the amount of heritable variation produced 

In the Origin of Species (65 ), Darwin emphasized that changed conditions lead to an increased production of heritable variation, as in the case of domestication (e.g., ref. 65, Ch. 1). These observations were largely ignored in the 20 th century despite supportive empirical data ( 144 )and despite the lack of a straightforward explanation otherwise ( 145 ). The results observed here that the rate of production of variation is higher under changing conditions is consistent with IBE as follows. a) Because mutation origination depends on infor-mation in the genome, the amount of variation produced increases with the amount of variation present. b) The closer the population is to a solution, the fewer ways there are to be as close to that solution. From ( a) and ( b) together, as the population closes in on an adaptation, less vari-ation is produced that is relevant to this adaptation. In addition, the present selection pressure is also important for generating variation: without a coherent selection pressure, no regularities among successful individuals can be found that allow the generation of meaningful heritable changes as modelled here. These mechanistic considerations are fundamentally different from hypotheses in evolutionary theory whereby an adaptive trait that has evolved by rm/ns makes individuals increase the production of heritable variation in response to stress that they sense within their lifetime ( 132–134 ). Here, it is differential survival per se that affects the produc-tion of variation through nonrandom, non-Lamarckian mutation, not the sensing of stress by 38 individuals. 

# 6.5 Bell-shaped curves and the maintenance of variation in the direction of selection 

Fisher argued that the bell-shaped distributions often observed in nature for continuous traits like height are explained by the assumption of additive contributions of separate genes to the same trait, in line with the CLT ( 66 ). However, we argue that the summation of independent random variables is not the only possible explanation for bell-shaped distributions: complex functions that are not dominated by any small subset of their variables may generate the ob-served distributions as well, as in our simulation. Also of interest in this connection, in accord with Beatty’s analysis of the history of evo-lutionary biology ( 68, 146 ), is that in our simulations, the distribution slides along with its mean with little effect on its standard deviation for multiple generations before the mean be-gins to plateau (Figure 8). This point is of interest because it bears on the conceptual reasons for the assumption of random mutation to begin with in ( 146 ). Darwin relied on the existence of ever-present small heritable variation in all directions to enable selection to lead the way in evolution ( 137, 146 ). However, when selection consumes heritable variation in a particular direction, what would replenish variation in that direction specifically and thus enable the ac-cumulation of many small selected changes in the same direction in the long term? Morgan considered that, by implying such replenishing in a specific direction, the assumption of ever-present variation in all directions introduced purpose into the evolutionary process ( 146 ) and, precisely in order to avoid this conclusion, he emphasized that there must be no connection between selection and the causes of mutation ( 146–149 )—that mutation must be random—and that it was not possible for phenotypic variation to be consistently maintained in the direction of selection. 13 In Beatty’s analysis, during the formation of the modern synthesis, investigators maintained Morgan’s separation between natural selection and the origin of genetic variation, but suggested how variation could be maintained after all in the direction of selection: by in-  

> 13 Morgan argued that such variation must eventually disappear until a new, rare, accidental mutation in the relevant direction arises and that, had there been a mechanism whereby survivors produced further variation in the direction of selection, it would have provided the explanation for the evolution of life, but that such a mechanism did not exist ( 146, 148 ).

39 teraction with alleles that have spread under selection, alleles of other genes previously neutral to the selection pressure could become relevant to it, allowing selection to generate its own variation ( 68, 150 ). This particular modern-synthetic argument, however, is inconsistent with the rest of the synthesis: separate, additive effects across genes were assumed to explain the bell-shaped distribution of continuous traits and to enable effective selection on randomly pro-duced variation despite sexual recombination, even while interactions between genes and sexual recombination were assumed to enable the range of variation to be indefinitely maintained over generations. In contrast, our model offers a different and self-consistent view: complex genetic interactions are responsible both for the observed bell-shaped distributions of continuous traits and for the maintenance of variation in the direction of selection. Selection maintains variation in its own direction through nonrandom, non-Lamarckian mutations, which require interactions between genes. 

# 6.6 The role of randomness 

According to standard evolutionary theory, the accident that supposedly generates a mutation endows that mutation with its own effect on the organism ( 1–3,5 ), and it only remains for selec-tion to test whether this effect is beneficial or not, as though random bits encode novel adaptive information directly. In contrast, in our simulation, random bits in and of themselves do not encode new adaptive information. Instead, they enable generalization by means of how they are connected with the rest of the evolutionary process: First, the RBM learns those relationships between alleles at different genomic loci that are common among surviving individuals. Next, the space of possible genotypes defined by the rules thus learned is randomly sampled by the free-running state of the RBM. This use of randomness relates to mixability theory ( 64, 72 ), better resonates with how randomness has been used in powerful algorithms ( 151,152 ), and contrasts with traditional hill-climbing analogies in evolution ( 60, 153–155 ). In the latter, the life form evolves step by step by a sequence of random mutations from a low-fitness to a high-fitness point. In contrast, in our simulation, randomization events of consecutive generations in and of themselves do not add up to form a direction. Instead, the randomization that takes place at each generation expands 40 on what already exists, and improvement arises from gradual convergence on a solution over generations 14 (17 ). 

# 6.7 Evolution as learning 

Several lines of work have attempted to explore theoretically the connection between evolution and learning (e.g., 18, 62, 107, 156–163). Among them was Valiant’s pioneering work on the evolvability model ( 62, 157 ). That work set to answer the question of whether rm/ns could account for the evolution of life given the amount of time that has been available for it ( 62 ). An-alytical population genetic models could not answer this question because, while they address the evolutionary dynamics of allele frequencies given selection coefficients etc., they do not include a representation of complex biological structure. Using the Probably Approximately Correct (PAC)–learning framework ( 164 ), Valiant constructed an analytical model with a repre-sentation of the phenotype in order to relate kinds of adaptations (functions, in the model) to the time it would take them to evolve by rm/ns, with all resources being polynomial in the number of inputs that may be required in the adaptive mechanism and in the inverse of the evolved error that would be acceptable in principle ( 62 ). In Valiant’s model, in the course of evolution, among a total set of possible literals and their negations, the correct subset of literals must be found that forms the domain of a given, many-arguments Boolean function such as conjunction, disjunction or parity ( 62 ). The evolving “hypothesis” is a set of literals, which is updated with a minimal “population” as in the “(1+1)” evolutionary algorithm ( 113, 165 ): a single individual, representing the evolving hypothesis, generates one more individual by a mutation that at random either adds a certain literal, drops a certain literal, or swaps one literal for another ( 62 ). New individuals are produced such that either a beneficial mutation is fixed or, if no such mutation exists, a slightly neutral random mutation is fixed. However, in developing the evolvability model, Valiant followed the dichotomy of random mutation vs. Lamarckism ( 5): he argued that the evolutionary algorithm cannot understand 

> 14 The part of the population favored in one generation is “expanded,” the part of this expansion favored in the next generation is expanded, etc.

41 the highly complex relationship between genotype and phenotype, and therefore evolutionary change cannot meaningfully depend on information regarding the situations that the individual encounters during its lifetime and the correct responses to them, but can only depend on the in-dividual’s overall fitness. 15 This exclusion of dependency on information from the environment is the exclusion of Lamarckism, and, in the evolvability framework, it turns evolution into a re-stricted form of the Statistical Query (SQ) model ( 63 )—itself a restricted form of standard PAC learning ( 164 ). With this exclusion, Valiant obtained that Boolean monotone conjunctions and disjunctions are evolvable 16 with polynomially bounded resources from any starting hypothesis over a uniform distribution of inputs, whereas Boolean parity functions, which are unnatural, are not ( 62 ). If one intuitively takes this restricted form of PAC learning to be weak, one could infer either that a weak biological evolutionary process is sufficient to produce life as we know it, or that the model does not capture real-world biological evolution to begin with ( 166 ). However, according to IBE, there is a way for the evolutionary process to depend meaningfully not only on the fitnesses of individuals, and not by Lamarckism; that is, mutations are neither random nor Lamarckian: the change of a variable depends on the values of other variables. To see how the IBE view is possible using the evolvability model as a starting point, one needs to rearrange its elements. In the evolvability model, the individual is the “hypothesis” that is evolving, and the inputs that the individual encounters during its lifetime are the “examples” that the hypothesis needs to classify correctly. In contrast, in our model, the individuals are the examples, whereas the hypothesis is at the population level and is about what makes these examples “positive”—what makes individuals survive and reproduce. The hypothesis is used to produce examples, selection chooses the better examples among these, and the chosen ex-amples serve as the basis for hypothesis improvement. Thus, unlike standard PAC learning, the examples used in the next generation are drawn neither independently nor from a distribution 

> 15 Considering “examples” to be input vectors received from the environment to which the individual needs to respond appropriately, and different individuals to be “competing hypotheses,” Valiant wrote: “In evolution, we assume that the updates depend only on the aggregate performance of the competing hypotheses on a distribution of examples or experiences, and in no additional way on the syntactic descriptions of the examples. This restriction reflects the idea that the relationship between the genotype and phenotype may be extremely complicated, and the evolution algorithm does not understand it.” (62, p. 3)
> 16 “Evolvability” means that for a given such type of function, the set of relevant literals can be found by a process meant to capture random mutation and natural selection that is efficient in terms of the time and space resources used.

42 that is fixed across generations: as the hypothesis evolves, the example distribution changes. This arrangement represents assumptions that are weaker not only than those of SQ but also than those of PAC without queries. Although Valiant allowed mutation to carry out any process that is polynomially computable by a Turing Machine so that one could account for duplications and deletions of sequences as well as for point mutations, as long as the evolvability framework does not explicitly suggest mutations that depend on genetic content and fan-in, all mutation types in it will remain random in a crucial sense. The attempts in genetic algorithms to use mutation types such as inver-sions that were independent of the genetic content followed the same approach, sans internal integration of information ( 110, 136 ). In contrast, we argue that the full consequences of the Turing completeness of mutation need to be explored in the case where evolving information is integrated by heritable change—namely within the IBE conceptual framework ( 17–19 ). Reconsideration of terminology such as “genetic algorithms” and “learning” can now sharpen the connection between evolution and cognition. Although Valiant cast evolution in terms of PAC learning and argued that this offers a unifying framework for evolution and cognition, in the evolvability model, evolution is actually a restricted form of PAC that is akin to basic EAs and univariate EDAs. In contrast, it is when mutations are neither random nor Lamarckian that mutational mechanisms become analogous to mechanisms of cognition and learning by the brain, such as Hebbian learning ( 56, 57 ) and chunking ( 108, 109 ). Thus, the modeling of mutations with fan-in of information brings evolution and cognition much closer together. 

# 6.8 Future research 

About a century ago, when Fisher attempted to provide a theory for evolution based on random mutation, it would have been incomparably harder to incorporate structure representing non-random mutation. Yet even today, standard population genetics, basic EAs, univariate EDAs, and the evolvability model based on standard PAC are all easier to analyze than multivari-ate EDAs ( 50, 51, 53 ), PAC with queries ( 167 ), and IBE. As Wigderson noted, standard PAC “sweeps under the rug” the fact that “in nature and practice, the hypothesis of the learner often generates action/behavior that affects the environment and future examples it may generate” 43 (152, p. 249). Interpreting multivariate EDAs through an IBE lens highlights a lacuna in previous research: neither in evolutionary theory nor in standard GAs has internal fan-in of information through heritable change been considered. In standard GAs, operators are applied at random, not guided by internal genetic information. In multivariate EDAs, internal integration of information is employed, but only in a biologically unrealistic manner. Future work should employ natural, concrete mechanisms of recombination and mutation as in GAs, but with internal fan-in of information as in multivariate EDAs. For this purpose, empirical observations within the IBE framework can be drawn upon ( 19, 34, 58 ). Examining the Turing completeness of heritable change as an internal integrator of evolving information is not a minor conceptual change but requires a reconceptualization of how evolu-tion happens. Using the evolvability model as an example, it requires a reconceptualization of what counts as hypothesis and examples, what roles the fundamental elements of evolution play and how they interact with each other—including that evolution is driven by the interaction of parsimony and fit. In pursuing this new direction, additional considerations should be kept in mind. First, in contrast to the RBM mechanism, which itself does not evolve over the generations, IBE argues that no arbitrary line separates between a fixed apparatus causing mutations on one hand and an ever-changing part of the genome on the other. Allowing mutational mechanisms to evolve poses a challenge for future research. Second, although beginning with randomized genomes and ending at equilibrium, as in our simulation, is a ubiquitous approach in evolutionary computation, this approach is biologically unrealistic. In reality, biological evolution neither starts at a tabula-rasa state nor stops. Diver-sity keeps being generated and new adaptations keep arising, not out of thin air but from the coming together of preexisting, simplified, well-working elements ( 18 ). 17 Although we have not attempted to solve these deep problems here, one must keep them in mind when interpret-ing the results. For example, while in our simulation, the amount of relevant variation decreases  

> 17 In fact, evolution itself is not known to have arisen from random noise at a particular point in space and time. Instead, there could have been a gradual transition from a “chemical” world to a world more and more “biological” ( 17 ).

44 in time, leading the RBM process to plateau, in nature, new variation and adaptations constantly arise. In addition to these challenging directions for future research, even the rudimentary model presented here can be explored further. Early evolution in the random mutation model seems to be finding the “low-hanging fruit”—the special solution-bits that satisfy many clauses (Nick Pippenger, personal communications), perhaps conceptually related to the basic approximation algorithm for k-MAXGSAT ( 130 ). In contrast, one of the most surprising features in the results is the rapid transition from low to high fitness of the RBM model in the transient, which raises several questions (Nick Pippenger, personal communications): What kind of learning is it do-ing? What is gained in the early generations that leads to a sudden transition in the transient? And, by the time the process ends, has the population learned in some sense the fitness function? 

# 6.9 Conclusions 

The RBM-based multivariate EDA model captures in an abstract and indirect manner several aspects of IBE: a) Heritable change is neither random nor Lamarckian: it responds to informa-tion accumulated in the genome over generations. At each generation, heritable changes arise based on the information accumulated internally thus far, and those that survive become a part of that information, affecting future generations’ heritable changes. b) Recombining pieces of heritable information do not merely sit side by side until they are separated again, but are actu-ally integrated through heritable change. As a result, the basic elements of evolution interact: sexual recombination generates a large variety of different combinations of genes; selection acts on these combinations as complex wholes; and these combinations have an effect on future generations through the mutations derived from them, enabled by mutational fan-in of infor-mation. c) The evolutionary process simulated is driven by the interaction of parsimony and fit: while the external force of natural selection provides the feedback on the fit between the organism and its environment, an internal force of natural simplification, driven by nonrandom, non-Lamarckian heritable change, integrates information, finding the commonalities between successful individuals—the principles underlying success. d) Randomization does not directly invent improvements but enables generalization by the manner in which it is connected with 45 the rest of the evolutionary system. While demonstrating the above, the results show a connec-tion between the strength of selection and the generation of genetic variation, the ability of a complex function involving interactions of alleles across loci to generate a bell-shaped distri-bution of a trait value, and the ability of this distribution to follow the direction of selection. Given the importance of sufficiently large population sizes in nature, it is also of interest that the RBM model requires a sufficiently large surviving population to learn from, whereas the RM model is encumbered by increasing the number of surviving individuals much beyond the top performers. The basic requirements on the nature of mutation in this model are natural and fitting in principle with a large number of empirical observations. This fact demonstrates concretely that another way of thinking is possible about how mutations arise and how evolution happens at the fundamental level besides rm/ns and Lamarckism. Future work will be needed to attempt to model IBE more realistically, one option being to combine the naturalness of concrete recom-bination and mutation mechanisms as in GAs with the fan-in of information through heritable change as in IBE. 

# Competing interests statement 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

# Acknowledgments 

We thank Sasha Bolshoy, Amit Livnat, Mor Naftali, Nick Pippenger, Yuri Rabinovich and Kim Weaver for extensive help and comments. This publication was made possible through the support of the Sagol Network, ISF grant 1986/16 to A.L., and John Templeton Foundation grant 62220 (subaward) to A.L. Computations presented in this work were partly performed on the Hive computer cluster at the University of Haifa, which is partly funded by ISF grant 2155/15. The opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the John Templeton Foundation. 46 References 

1. Morgan TH (1903) Evolution and Adaptation . (The Macmillan Company, New York). 2. Fisher RA (1930) The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection . (The Clarendon Press, Oxford). 3. Dawkins R (1986) The Blind Watchmaker . (Norton & Company, Inc.). 4. Lenski RE, Mittler JE (1993) The directed mutation controversy and neo-Darwinism. Sci-ence 259:188–194. 5. Futuyma DJ (1998) Evolution . (Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, MA), 3rd edition. 6. Koonin EV, Wolf YI (2009) Is evolution Darwinian or/and Lamarckian? Biology Direct 

4(1):42. 7. Merlin F (2010) Evolutionary chance mutation: A defense of the modern synthesis’ con-sensus view. Philosophy & Theory in Biology 2:22. 8. Lamarck JB (1809) Philosophie Zoologique, ou exposition des considérations relatives à l’histoire naturelle des animaux. (Paris: Dentu). 9. Haig D (2007) Weismann rules! Ok? Epigenetics and the Lamarckian temptation. Biology & Philosophy 22(3):415–428. 10. Livnat A, Papadimitriou C (2016) Sex as an algorithm: the theory of evolution under the lens of computation. Communications of the ACM 59(11):84–93. 11. Luria SE, Delbrück M (1943) Mutations of bacteria from virus sensitivity to virus resis-tance. Genetics 28(6):491–511. 12. Lederberg J, Lederberg EM (1952) Replica plating and indirect selection of bacterial mu-tants. Journal of Bacteriology 63(3):399–406. 13. Feldman MW, Liberman U (1986) An evolutionary reduction principle for genetic modi-fiers. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 83:4824–4827. 47 14. Altenberg L, Feldman MW (1987) Selection, generalized transmission and the evolution of modifier genes. i. the reduction principle. Genetics 117:559–572. 15. Lynch M (2010) Evolution of the mutation rate. Trends in Genetics 26(8):345–352. 16. Hodgkinson A, Eyre-Walker A (2011) Variation in the mutation rate across mammalian genomes. Nature Reviews Genetics 12:756–766. 17. Livnat A (2013) Interaction-based evolution: how natural selection and nonrandom muta-tion work together. Biology Direct 8(1):24. 18. Livnat A (2017) Simplification, innateness, and the absorption of meaning from context: how novelty arises from gradual network evolution. Evolutionary Biology 44(2):145–189. 19. Livnat A, Melamed D (2023) Evolutionary honing in and mutational replacement: how long-term directed mutational responses to specific environmental pressures are possible. 

Theory in Biosciences 142(2):87–105. 20. Haldane JBS (1949) The rate of mutation of human genes. Hereditas 35(S1):267–273. 21. Vogel F, Motulsky A (1997) Human genetics: problems and approaches . (Springer-Verlag, Berlin). 22. Kondrashov AS (2003) Direct estimates of human per nucleotide mutation rates at 20 loci causing Mendelian diseases. Human Mutation 21(1):12–27. 23. Ségurel L, Wyman MJ, Przeworski M (2014) Determinants of mutation rate variation in the human germline. Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics 15:47–70. 24. Rahbari R, et al. (2016) Timing, rates and spectra of human germline mutation. Nature Genetics 48(2):126. 25. Melamed D, et al. (2022) De novo mutation rates at the single-mutation resolution in a hu-man HBB gene-region associated with adaptation and genetic disease. Genome Research 

32:488–498. 48 26. Allison AC (1954) Protection afforded by sickle-cell trait against subtertian malarial in-fection. BMJ British Medical Journal 1:290–294. 27. Cavalli-Sforza LL, Feldman MW (2003) The application of molecular genetic approaches to the study of human evolution. Nature Genetics 33(3):266–275. 28. Freeman S, Herron JC (2007) Evolutionary Analysis . (Pearson Benjamin Cummings, San Francisco, CA), 4th edition. 29. Hartl DL, Clark AG (2007) Principles of Population Genetics . (Sinauer Associates, Sun-derland, Massachusetts), 4th edition. 30. Pauling L, Itano HA, Singer SJ, Wells IC (1949) Sickle-cell anemia, a molecular disease. 

Science 110:543–548. 31. Flint J, Harding RM, Boyce AJ, Clegg JB (1998) The population genetics of the haemoglobinopathies. Baillière’s Clinical Haematology 11:1–51. 32. Kwiatkowski DP (2005) How malaria has affected the human genome and what human genetics can teach us about malaria. The American Journal of Human Genetics 77(2):171– 192. 33. Piel FB, et al. (2010) Global distribution of the sickle cell gene and geographical confir-mation of the malaria hypothesis. Nature Communications 1:104. 34. Melamed D, et al. (2025) De novo rates of a Trypanosoma -resistant mutation in two human populations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 

122(35):e2424538122. 35. Martincorena I, Luscombe NM (2013) Non-random mutation: the evolution of targeted hypermutation and hypomutation. Bioessays 35(2):123–130. 36. Walsh B, Lynch M (2018) Evolution and Selection of Quantitative Traits . (Oxford Uni-versity Press, Oxford, UK). 49 37. Monroe J, et al. (2022) Mutation bias reflects natural selection in Arabidopsis thaliana .

Nature pp. 101–105. 38. Baluja S (1994) Population-based incremental learning: A method for integrating genetic search based function optimization and competitive learning, (Carnegie Mellon Univer-sity, Pittsburgh, PA, USA), Technical Report CMU-CS-94-163. 39. Mühlenbein H, Paaß G (1996) From recombination of genes to the estimation of distri-butions I: Binary parameters in Parallel Problem Solving from Nature — PPSN IV , Lec-ture Notes in Computer Science, eds. Voigt HM, Ebeling W, Rechenberg I, Schwefel HP. (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg), Vol. 1141, pp. 178–187. 40. Bonet JSD, Jr. CLI, Viola P (1996) MIMIC: Finding optima by estimating probability densities in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 1996) , eds. Mozer MC, Jordan MI, Petsche T. (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA), Vol. 9, pp. 424–430. 41. Baluja S, Davies S (1997) Using optimal dependency-trees for combinatorial optimiza-tion: Learning the structure of the search space in Proceedings of the Fourteenth Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 1997) , ed. Fisher DH. (Morgan Kauf-mann, San Francisco, CA), pp. 30–38. 42. Harik GR, Lobo FG, Goldberg DE (1998) The compact genetic algorithm in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Evolutionary Computation (ICEC) . (IEEE), pp. 523–528. 43. Pelikan M, Mühlenbein H (1999) The bivariate marginal distribution algorithm in Ad-vances in Soft Computing: Engineering Design and Manufacturing , eds. Roy R, Fu-ruhashi T, Chawdhry PK. (Springer, London), pp. 521–535. 44. Harik G (1999) Linkage learning via probabilistic modelling in the ECGA, (Illinois Ge-netic Algorithms Laboratory, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA), Technical Report 99010. 50 45. Mühlenbein H, Mahnig T (1999) FDA – a scalable evolutionary algorithm for the opti-mization of additively decomposed functions. Evolutionary Computation 7(4):353–376. 46. Etxeberria R, Larrañaga P (1999) Global optimization using Bayesian networks in Pro-ceedings of the Second Symposium on Artificial Intelligence (CIMAF-99) . pp. 332–339. 47. Pelikan M, Goldberg DE, Cantú-Paz E (1999) BOA: the Bayesian optimization algorithm in Proceedings of the 1 st Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation .Vol. 1, pp. 525–532. 48. Probst M, Rothlauf F, Grahl J (2017) Scalability of using restricted Boltzmann machines for combinatorial optimization. European Journal of Operational Research 256(2):368– 383. 49. Doerr B, Dufay M (2022) General univariate estimation-of-distribution algorithms in Par-allel Problem Solving from Nature — PPSN XVII , eds. Rudolph G, et al. (Springer), pp. 470–484. 50. Lehre PK, Nguyen PTH (2019) On the limitations of the univariate marginal distribution algorithm to deception and where bivariate EDAs might help in Proceedings of the 15th ACM/SIGEVO Conference on Foundations of Genetic Algorithms . pp. 154–168. 51. Krejca MS, Witt C (2020) Theory of estimation-of-distribution algorithms in Theory of evolutionary computation: Recent developments in discrete optimization , eds. Doerr B, Neumann F. (Springer, Cham, Switzerland), pp. 405–442. 52. Pelikan M, Goldberg DE, Lobo FG (2002) A survey of optimization by building and using probabilistic models. Computational Optimization and Applications 21(1):5–20. 53. Larrañaga P, Bielza C (2023) Estimation of distribution algorithms in machine learning: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 28(5):1301–1321. 54. Smolensky P (1986) Information processing in dynamical systems: Foundations of har-mony theory in Parallel Distributed Processing: Explorations in the Microstructure of 

51 Cognition , eds. Rumelhart DE, McClelland JL, PDP Research Group. (MIT Press, Cam-bridge, MA) Vol. 1, p. 194–281. 55. Hinton GE (2002) Training products of experts by minimizing contrastive divergence. 

Neural Computation 14(8):1771–1800. 56. Hebb D (1949) The Organization of Behavior . (Wiley & Sons, New York). 57. Löwel S, Singer W (1992) Selection of intrinsic horizontal connections in the visual cortex by correlated neuronal activity. Science 255(5041):209–212. 58. Bolotin E, Melamed D, Livnat A (2023) Genes that are used together are more likely to be fused together in evolution by mutational mechanisms: A bioinformatic test of the used-fused hypothesis. Evolutionary Biology 50(1):30–55. 59. Wright S (1931) Evolution in mendelian populations. Genetics 16:97–159. 60. Wright S (1932) The roles of mutation, inbreeding, crossbreeding and selection in evolu-tion. Proceedings of the Sixth International Congress of Genetics 1:356–366. 61. Haldane J (1932) The Causes of Evolution . (Longmans, Green and Co., London). 62. Valiant LG (2009) Evolvability. Journal of the ACM 56(1):1–21. 63. Kearns M (1998) Efficient noise-tolerant learning from statistical queries. Journal of the ACM 45(6):983–1006. 64. Vasylenko L, Feldman MW, Livnat A (2020) The power of randomization by sex in mul-tilocus genetic evolution. Biology Direct 15(1):26. 65. Darwin C (1859) On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preser-vation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life. (John Murray, London), 1st edition. 66. Fisher R (1918) The correlation between relatives on the supposition of Mendelian inher-itance. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh 53:399–433. 52 67. Falconer D, Mackay T (1996) Introduction to Quantitative Genetics . (Longman, Harlow, Essex). 68. Beatty J (2019) The creativity of natural selection? Part II: The synthesis and since. Jour-nal of the History of Biology 52(4):705–731. 69. Livnat A, Papadimitriou C, Dushoff J, Feldman MW (2008) A mixability theory for the role of sex in evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105(50):19803– 19808. 70. Livnat A, Papadimitriou C, Pippenger N, Feldman MW (2010) Sex, mixability, and mod-ularity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107(4):1452–1457. 71. Livnat A, Papadimitriou C, Feldman MW (2011) An analytical contrast between fitness maximization and selection for mixability. Journal of theoretical biology 273(1):232–234. 72. Vasylenko L, Feldman MW, Papadimitriou C, Livnat A (2019) Sex: the power of random-ization. Theoretical Population Biology 129:41–53. 73. Srivastava N, Hinton G, Krizhevsky A, Sutskever I, Salakhutdinov R (2014) Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. Journal of Machine Learning Research 15(1):1929–1958. 74. LeCun Y, Bengio Y, Hinton G (2015) Deep learning. Nature 521(7553):436–444. 75. Larrañaga P, Lozano JA (2002) Estimation of Distribution Algorithms: A New Tool for Evolutionary Computation . (Kluwer Academic Publishers, New York, NY). 76. Hauschild M, Pelikan M (2011) An introduction and survey of estimation of distribution algorithms. Swarm and Evolutionary Computation 1(3):111–128. 77. Shim VA, Tan KC, Cheong CY, Chia JY (2013) Enhancing the scalability of multi-objective optimization via restricted boltzmann machine-based estimation of distribution algorithm. Information Sciences 248:191–213. 53 78. Ceberio J, Irurozki E, Mendiburu A, Lozano JA (2014) A distance-based ranking model estimation of distribution algorithm for the flowshop scheduling problem. IEEE Transac-tions on Evolutionary Computation 18(2):286–300. 79. Liang X, Chen H, Lozano JA (2015) A Boltzmann-based estimation of distribution al-gorithm for a general resource scheduling model. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 19(6):793–806. 80. Bell G (1982) The Masterpiece of Nature: the Evolution and Genetics of Sexuality . (Uni-versity of California Press, Berkeley). 81. Barton NH, Charlesworth B (1998) Why sex and recombination? Science 281:1986–1990. 82. Stebbins GL (1950) Variation and Evolution in Plants . (Columbia University Press, New York). 83. Stebbins GL (1957) Self fertilization and population variability in the higher plants. Amer-ican Naturalist 91:337–354. 84. Williams GC (1966) Adaptation and Natural Selection . (Princeton University Press). 85. Van Valen L (1975) Group selection, sex, and fossils. Evolution 29:87–94. 86. Eshel I, Feldman MW (1970) On the evolutionary effect of recombination. Theoretical Population Biology 1(1):88–100. 87. Lewontin R (1971) The effect of genetic linkage on the mean fitness of a population. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 68(5):984–986. 88. West SA, Lively CM, Read AF (1999) A pluralist approach to sex and recombination. 

Journal of Evolutionary Biology 12:1003–1012. 89. Muller HJ (1932) Some genetic aspects of sex. American Naturalist 66:118–138. 90. Hamilton WD (1980) Sex versus non-sex versus parasite. Oikos 35:282–290. 54 91. Jaenike J (1978) A hypothesis to account for the maintenance of sex within populations. 

Evolutionary Theory 3:191–194. 92. Gould SJ, Vrba ES (1982) Exaptation—a missing term in the science of form. Paleobiol-ogy 8(01):4–15. 93. Müller GB (1990) Developmental mechanisms at the origin of morphological novelty: A side-effect hypothesis in Evolutionary Innovations , ed. Nitecki M. (University of Chicago Press, Chicago), pp. 99–130. 94. Müller GB, Wagner GP (1991) Novelty in evolution: restructuring the concept. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 22:229–256. 95. Schlichting CD, Pigliucci M (1998) Phenotypic Evolution: A Reaction Norm Perspective .(Sinauer Associates Incorporated). 96. Graur D, Li WH (2000) Fundamentals of Molecular Evolution . (Sinauer Associates, Sun-derland, MA). 97. West-Eberhard MJ (2003) Developmental Plasticity and Evolution . (Oxford University Press). 98. Hallgrímsson B, et al. (2012) The generation of variation and the developmental basis for evolutionary novelty. Journal of Experimental Zoology Part B: Molecular and Develop-mental Evolution 318(6):501–517. 99. Müller GB, Newman SA (2005) The innovation triad: an evodevo agenda. Journal of Experimental Zoology Part B: Molecular and Developmental Evolution 304(6):487–503. 100. Moczek AP (2008) On the origins of novelty in development and evolution. BioEssays 

30(5):432–447. 101. Gould SJ (2002) The Structure of Evolutionary Theory . (Harvard University Press). 102. Jackson DA, Hassan AB, Errington RJ, Cook PR (1993) Visualization of focal sites of transcription within human nuclei. The EMBO Journal 12(3):1059. 55 103. Edelman LB, Fraser P (2012) Transcription factories: genetic programming in three di-mensions. Current Opinion in Genetics & Development 22(2):110–114. 104. Dixon JR, et al. (2012) Topological domains in mammalian genomes identified by analysis of chromatin interactions. Nature 485(7398):376–380. 105. Papantonis A, Cook PR (2013) Transcription factories: genome organization and gene regulation. Chemical Reviews 113(11):8683–8705. 106. Soler-Oliva ME, Guerrero-Martínez JA, Bachetti V, Reyes JC (2017) Analysis of the re-lationship between coexpression domains and chromatin 3D organization. PLOS Compu-tational Biology 13(9):e1005708. 107. Livnat A, Papadimitriou C (2016) Evolution and learning: used together, fused together. A response to Watson and Szathmáry. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 31(12):894–896. 108. Lindley R (1966) Recording as a function of chunking and meaningfulness. Psychonomic Science 6:393–394. 109. Tulving E, Craik FI (2005) The Oxford Handbook of Memory . (Oxford University Press). 110. Holland JH (1975) Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems: An Introductory Analysis with Applications to Biology, Control, and Artificial Intelligence. (University of Michigan Press). 111. De Jong KA (1975) Phd thesis (University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI). UMI Disserta-tion 76-9381. 112. Goldberg DE (1989) Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine Learning .(Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA). 113. Droste S, Jansen T, Wegener I (2002) On the analysis of the (1+ 1) evolutionary algorithm. 

Theoretical Computer Science 276(1-2):51–81. 56 114. Tang H, Shim VA, Tan KC, Chia JY (2010) Restricted boltzmann machine based algo-rithm for multi-objective optimization in Proceedings of the IEEE Congress on Evolu-tionary Computation (CEC) . (IEEE), pp. 1–8. 115. Shim V, Tan KC, Chia J (2010) Probabilistic based evolutionary optimizers in bi-objective travelling salesman problem in Simulated Evolution and Learning , Lecture Notes in Com-puter Science, eds. Deb K, et al. (Springer), Vol. 6457, pp. 588–592. 116. Shim V, Tan KC (2012) Probabilistic graphical approaches for learning, modeling, and sampling in evolutionary multi-objective optimization in Advances in Computational In-telligence , Lecture Notes in Computer Science, eds. Liu J, Alippi C, Bouchon-Meunier B, Greenwood G, Abbass H. (Springer), Vol. 7311, pp. 122–144. 117. Shim VA, Tan KC, Chia JY, Al Mamun A (2013) Multi-objective optimization with es-timation of distribution algorithm in a noisy environment. Evolutionary Computation 

21(1):149–177. 118. Bao L, Sun X, Gong D, Zhang Y (2022) Multisource heterogeneous user-generated contents-driven interactive estimation of distribution algorithms for personalized search. 

IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 26(5):844–858. 119. Probst M (2015) Generative adversarial networks in estimation of distribution algorithms for combinatorial optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.09235 .120. Probst M, Rothlauf F (2020) Harmless overfitting: Using denoising autoencoders in esti-mation of distribution algorithms. Journal of Machine Learning Research 21(78):1–31. 121. Jeong JH, Lee E, Lee JH, Ahn CW (2022) Multi-objective deep network-based estimation of distribution algorithm for music composition. IEEE Access 10:71973–71985. 122. Rothlauf F (2011) Design of Modern Heuristics: Principles and Application . (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg). 57 123. Ackley DH, Hinton GE, Sejnowski TJ (1985) A learning algorithm for Boltzmann ma-chines. Cognitive Science 9(1):147–169. 124. Hinton G, Sejnowski T (1986) Learning and relearning in boltzmann machines in Parallel Distributed Processing, Volume 1: Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition , eds. Rumelhart DE, McClelland JL, PDP Research Group. (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA), p. 194–281. 125. Yegnanarayana B (2003) Artificial Neural Networks . (Prentice Hall of India). 126. Pedregosa F, et al. (2011) Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research 12(85):2825–2830. 127. Tieleman T (2008) Training restricted boltzmann machines using approximations to the likelihood gradient in Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Machine Learning , ICML ’08. (Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA), p. 1064–1071. 128. Tieleman T, Hinton G (2009) Using fast weights to improve persistent contrastive diver-gence in Proceedings of the 26th annual international conference on machine learning .pp. 1033–1040. 129. Hinton GE (2010) A practical guide to training restricted boltzmann machines, (University of Toronto), Technical Report UTML TR 2010–003. 130. Papadimitriou C (1994) Computational Complexity . (Addison-Wesley Publishing Com-pany). 131. Balint A, Belov A, Järvisalo M, Sinz C (2012) SAT challenge 2012 random SAT track: Description of benchmark generation in Proceedings of SAT Challenge 2012: Solver and Benchmark Descriptions , Department of Computer Science Series of Publications B, eds. Balint A, et al. (University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland), Vol. B-2012-2. 58 132. Radman M (1999) Mutation: enzymes of evolutionary change. Nature 401(6756):866– 869. 133. Ram Y, Hadany L (2012) The evolution of stress-induced hypermutation in asexual popu-lations. Evolution 66(7):2315–2328. 134. Ram Y, Hadany L (2014) Stress-induced mutagenesis and complex adaptation. Proceed-ings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences 281(1792):20141025. 135. Goldberg DE, Korb B, Deb K (1989) Messy genetic algorithms: Motivation, analysis, and first results. Complex Systems 3(5):493–530. 136. Goldberg DE, Bridges CL (1990) An analysis of a reordering operator on a GA-hard problem. Biological Cybernetics 62(5):397–405. 137. Provine W (1971) The Origins of Theoretical Population Genetics . (University of Chicago Press, Chicago). 138. Mendel JG (1866) Versuche über pflanzenhybriden. Verhandlungen des naturforschenden Vereines in Brünn IV:3–47. Published for the year 1865. For the English translation, see Druery and Bateson (1901) in Journal of the Royal Horticultural Society , vol. 26, pp. 1–32. 139. Ewens WJ (2004) Mathematical Population Genetics. I. Theoretical Introduction, 2nd ed. 

(Springer Science & Business Media). 140. Okasha S (2008) Fisher’s fundamental theorem of natural selection—a philosophical anal-ysis. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 59(3):319–351. 141. Wright S (1930) The genetical theory of natural selection: A review. Journal of Heredity 

21(8):349–356. 142. Mayr E (1955) Integration of genotypes: synthesis. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology 20:327–333. 59 143. Mayr E (1963) Animal Species and Evolution . (Belknap Press). 144. Nevo E, Beiles A, Ben-Shlomo R (1984) The evolutionary significance of genetic diver-sity: Ecological, demographic and life history correlates in Evolutionary Dynamics of Genetic Diversity , Lecture Notes in Biomathematics, ed. Mani GS. (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg) Vol. 53. 145. Leffler EM, et al. (2012) Revisiting an old riddle: what determines genetic diversity levels within species. PLOS Biology 10(9):e1001388. 146. Beatty J (2016) The creativity of natural selection? part i: Darwin, darwinism, and the mutationists. Journal of the History of Biology 49:659–684. 147. Morgan TH (1925) Evolution and Genetics . (Princeton University Press, Princeton). 148. Morgan TH (1935) The Scientific Basis of Evolution, 2nd ed. (Norton, New York). 149. Allen G (1978) Thomas Hunt Morgan: The Man and His Science . (Princeton University Press, Princeton). 150. Chetverikov SS ([1926] 1961) On certain aspects of the evolutionary process from the standpoint of modern genetics. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 

105(2):167–195. 151. Motwani R, Raghavan P (1995) Randomized Algorithms . (Cambridge University Press). 152. Wigderson A (2019) Mathematics and computation: A theory revolutionizing technology and science . (Princeton University Press). 153. Kauffman S, Levin S (1987) Towards a general theory of adaptive walks on rugged land-scapes. Journal of theoretical Biology 128(1):11–45. 154. Dawkins R (1996) Climbing Mount Improbable . (W. W. Norton & Company). 155. Gavrilets S (2004) Fitness landscapes and the origin of species . (Princeton University Press) Vol. 41. 60 156. Feldman V (2008) Evolvability from learning algorithms in Proceedings of the Fortieth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing . pp. 619–628. 157. Valiant L (2013) Probably Approximately Correct: Nature’s Algorithms for Learning and Prospering in a Complex World . (Basic Books). 158. Chastain E, Livnat A, Papadimitriou C, Vazirani U (2014) Algorithms, games, and evolu-tion. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111(29):10620–10623. 159. Watson RA, Wagner GP, Pavlicev M, Weinreich DM, Mills R (2014) The evolution of phenotypic correlations and “developmental memory”. Evolution 68(4):1124–1138. 160. Angelino E, Kanade V (2014) Attribute-efficient evolvability of linear functions in Pro-ceedings of the 5th conference on Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science . (ACM), pp. 287–300. 161. Watson R, Szathmáry E (2016) How can evolution learn? Trends in Ecology & Evolution 

31(2):147–157. 162. Kouvaris K, Clune J, Kounios L, Brede M, Watson RA (2017) How evolution learns to generalise: Using the principles of learning theory to understand the evolution of devel-opmental organisation. PLOS Computational Biology 13(4):e1005358. 163. Vanchurin V, Wolf YI, Katsnelson MI, Koonin EV (2022) Toward a theory of evo-lution as multilevel learning. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 

119(6):e2120037119. 164. Valiant LG (1984) A theory of the learnable. Communications of the ACM 27(11):1134– 1142. 165. Bäck T, Schwefel HP (1993) An overview of evolutionary algorithms for parameter opti-mization. Evolutionary Computation 1(1):1–23. 166. Davis E (2013) PAC: A universal framework for learning? SIAM News 46(8):25. 61 167. Diakonikolas I, Kane DM, Kontonis V, Tzamos C, Zarifis N (2024) Agnostically learning multi-index models with queries in 2024 IEEE 65th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS) . (IEEE), pp. 1931–1952. 62