Title: Adaptation by Cumulative Selection

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.20883v1

Published Time: Wed, 25 Feb 2026 01:54:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 34

Markdown Content:
# Adaptation by Cumulative Selection 

## Rudy Arthur ∗11Department of Computer Science, University of Exeter, Exeter EX4 4PY, UK February 25, 2026 

Abstract 

Biological systems like long-lived clonal organisms, holobionts and clades challenge traditional evolutionary thinking since they adapt without populations or reproduction. This paper aims to provide an overar-ching theoretical framework which encompasses standard Darwinian evolution as well as other processes of adaptation. This framework is cumulative selection and I provide a general ‘recipe’ for it to occur. Lewontin’s recipe for evolution by natural selection is shown to be a particular example of cumulative selection, but not the only one. Sim-ilarly, reproduction, inheritance and populations are just one way to perform cumulative selection. I discuss several other examples of cu-mulative selection including clonal organisms, dioecious populations, Gaia and neural networks. 

# 1 Introduction 

Persistence based selection [Bouchard, 2004, 2011, Ford Doolittle, 2014, Charbonneau, 2014, Bourrat, 2014, Toman and Flegr, 2017, Papale, 2021] has been gaining attention as a way to provide an evolutionary explanation for biological systems like holobionts [Doolittle and Booth, 2017], clonal organisms [Bouchard, 2008], insect colonies [Bouchard, 2014], Gaia [Lenton et al., 2018] or even taxonomic categories like clades [Doolittle, 2017]. These examples don’t comfortably fit in either the traditional Darwinian paradigm or more expansive frameworks like group selection [Okasha, 2006] and niche construction [Odling-Smee et al., 1996]. The problems are 

> ∗

Corresponding author: R.Arthur@exeter.ac.uk 

1

> arXiv:2602.20883v1 [q-bio.PE] 24 Feb 2026

1. Identifying a Darwinian population [Godfrey-Smith, 2009] 2. Understanding reproduction For example, the well known objection to Gaia, made by Dawkins [Dawkins, 1982] and Gould [Gould, 2002], is that there is only one of her (no popula-tion) and she doesn’t generate ‘daughter planets’ (no reproduction), hence evolution of Gaia, by definition, is impossible. Persistence based selection and the related idea It’s the song not the Singer (ITSNTS) [Doolittle and Inkpen, 2018] try to address this by replac-ing reproduction with the idea that the same ‘patterns’ must persist over time. For evolution by natural selection (ENS) the pattern is a phenotype and the mechanism of persistence is the copying of genotypes through repro-duction. However there are other types of persistence. Individual plants like seagrasses [Bricker et al., 2018] or the quaking aspen grove Pando [Pineau et al., 2024] can persist for thousands or tens of thousands of years through clonal propagation. Ecological patterns can persist over geological time, the modern nitrogen cycle has persisted for around 2.7 billion years [Canfield et al., 2010], though the species which carry out each function have changed significantly. Prior work on persistence based selection addresses the reproduction problem by recognising that reproduction is only one way for patterns to persist. While there are criticisms of this programme [Zhang and Li, 2025], it is well now established. Less discussed is the population problem (though see [Bourrat, 2023]). What does it mean to ‘select’ from a set of one? Even advocates of a more expansive view of evolution have argued that natural selection is an “intrinsically population level” process [Sober, 1984]. Survival of the fittest implies multiple individuals and evolution is often defined as changes of gene frequencies in populations [Dobzhansky, 1937]. In this paper we want to address both issues to explain adaptations occurring in systems like Pando or Gaia which cannot be explained by stan-dard ENS. Such explanations must not invoke design, teleology or events so improbable as to be functionally impossible. We are working in the adaptationist paradigm, so we want to be able to construct explanations for these patterns on the basis of their selective (dis)advantage, with this notion suitably extended to make sense for systems without reproduction and/or populations of one. This is not a claim that such explanations are the only correct ones. For example, the theory of constructive neutral evolu-tion (CNE) [Stoltzfus, 1999, Lukeˇ s et al., 2011, Brunet and Doolittle, 2018] provides convincing argument that neutral change, rather than adaptation, is responsible for the complexity of cellular machinery. The correctness of 2an adaptationist account of complexity versus a neutral one depends on the system and the adaptation, the purpose of this paper is to be able to make the adaptationist argument in the first place. What evolution by natural selection can and cannot explain was brought into focus by the debate between Sober and Neander [Sober, 1984, Nean-der, 1995b, Sober, 1995, Neander, 1995a] about the ‘negative’ (Sober) versus ‘positive’ (Neander) view of ENS. For our purposes we do not need to re-count this debate or pick a winner 1, the key thing for us is that Neander [1995b] argues that cumulative selection is the basic mechanism through which adaptations arise by random variation, a point on which Sober agrees [Sober, 1995]. The idea of cumulative selection that is, innovation built on previous innovation, will be key for us. In this paper I will explore cumulative selection in detail and provide general conditions for when it can occur. These general conditions are anal-ogous to Lewontin’s recipe [Lewontin, 1970], in that they give necessary and sufficient conditions for cumulative selection to operate. However, more than just an analogy or extension of standard ENS, these conditions generalise 

Lewontin’s recipe. Thus Lewontin’s recipe, and therefore ENS, is a special case of cumulative selection acting in a particular type of biological system - a population of phenotypically diverse individuals. We will show there are systems which do not fit Lewontin’s recipe, but do satisfy the conditions for cumulative selection. Those systems are just the problematic cases men-tioned above like Gaia and Pando. In this framework, rather than stretching the meaning of standard terms like ‘Darwinian’ [Doolittle, 2024] or ‘growth as a form of reproduction’ [Godfrey-Smith, 2009] we can simply take the standard meanings and recognise that the way a population evolves and the way Pando grows are different realisations of the same general process of cumulative selection. By this we also achieve several other things. First, we unify and for-malise many of the different approaches to selection currently discussed in the literature and cited above. Second, by formalising the conditions for cumulative selection one can readily determine if they apply in situations of biological interest. This can help determine the appropriate level of analy-sis, as shown in the examples of Section 4, and also allows us to be quite precise in the use of terms like ‘random variation’ and ‘complex adaptation’. Thus, this work is intended as a practical as well as conceptual advance in the understanding of evolutionary dynamics. The outline of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 I construct a minimal 

> 1Though it will be clear in the following that I favour Neander

3model of cumulative selection, which will provide the template for how we discuss cumulative selection in non-reproducing populations of one. After solving the model in Appendix A, in Section 3 I abstract its key features to provide a general recipe for cumulative selection, of which Lewontin’s recipe [Lewontin, 1970] for ENS is a particular case. I then provide a number of examples in Section 4 of situations where standard ENS does not occur but cumulative selection does. These examples will also recast some well known results in a new light and connect this framework in an interesting way to machine learning. I conclude in Section 5 that this recipe provides an overarching framework that encompasses ENS as well as other processes of biological interest. Before beginning I make two points. Firstly, if biologists want to re-serve the term ‘evolution’ for a process that acts on populations and re-quires reproduction and inheritance, that is reasonable. My argument is that cumulative selection can happen in systems without populations and reproduction. The term ‘learning’ might be appropriate, though there are some reservations about this name, which I discuss in Section 5. Secondly, the model I introduce is analysed mathematically and through computer simulations. Doing this forces a degree of precision that a purely verbal model can elide. The mathematical details are given in Appendix A but the paper can be followed without them. 

# 2 A model of selection 

This model is based on one described in [Dawkins, 1986] and [Neander, 1995b]. For Dawkins’ version, consider a device like a combination lock with 23 wheels which can each be spun to display the letters A-Z. Starting from a random sequence we try to end up on the target sequence 

M ET HIN KSIT ISLIKEAW EASEL 

Dawkins implements a kind of sequence ‘breeding’ but we are just going to spin the wheels randomly. [Neander, 1995b] describes the same model using the example of a lottery. A random number sequence is drawn, consisting of 7 numbers between 1 and 30 and she wants to find a matching ticket. Both Dawkins and Neander contrast the strategy of randomly picking se-quences, which has an extremely low probability of finding a match, against a cumulative strategy. In the cumulative strategy whenever a correct letter or number is found, it is fixed and this strategy can find the target much faster. 4‘Extremely low’ and ‘much faster’ do not do justice to the difference between the two situations. If p is the probability of a match at one position and L is the length of the sequence, the expected waiting time for a random search is 1 /p L. For a cumulative search the worst case is L/p . So, for Dawkins’ combination lock, if we randomly guessed one combination per second we would expect to have to try for 10 25 years to get the target phrase, equal to around one quadrillion times the age of the universe. With the cumulative strategy, we would expect to guess the target phrase in about 10 minutes. Generalising Dawkins and Neander’s examples, consider N sequences of length L, made using the characters from an alphabet of size b. Fix a sequence, called the target, which we aim to match. Note, neither, I, Dawkins or Neander are claiming evolution is searching for a specific target. Rather we are considering the inverse problem - how long would it take to evolve something complex and unlikely (an eye) from humble beginnings (a light sensitive membrane). We approach the target using a cumulative or ratcheting search, for discussion of other evolutionary ratchets see for example, Lukeˇ s et al. [2011] regarding CNE, Tennie et al. [2009] for cultural evolution and [Arthur and Nicholson, 2022] for Gaia Theory. In this case it means at some moment we have a ‘state’ or template consisting of k matches and L − k mismatches, for example, 

M ExxxxN KSxT ISLxxEAxxASxL 

We generate N new sequences by copying the current best state. We change the correct characters with probability ν and change the mis-matched ones with probability μ. We then choose the sequence with the most matches as the template for the next round and repeat the process until the target is reached. In the case of a tie, two sequences with different matches but the same number, we pick one at random to be the new state. Dawkins’ model would correspond to L = 23, b = 26, Neander’s to L = 7, b = 30 and both to ν = 0, μ = 1. We will mostly consider the case N = 1, where we don’t have a population and the best state is always the current one. No reproduction is implied here, to pick the lock we just spin the wheels every time-step, there is no need to destroy the lock and make a new one. At first we will examine the case with no ‘back-mutation’, ν = 0, to make the model more tractable. Consideration of ν̸ = 0 will be important for defining the equivalent of heredity. I will refer to this model as the lottery model after [Neander, 1995b]. 52.1 Ordered versus unordered paths 

In the famous ‘Spandrels of san Marco’ paper, Gould and Lewontin [1979] argued that certain observations might be better described as being due to developmental constraints rather than ENS. There is a problem with a similar flavour in this simple model, where developmental constraints might slow or even prevent us from reaching the target. Consider a transformation taking the word HEAD to the word T AIL , one letter at a time. If we allow only valid words at each step a possible path is 

HEAD HEAL T EAL T ELL T ALL T AIL 

This is an example of a word ladder 2. A much simpler task, which is the version considered by Dawkins and Neander, permits any string at the in-termediate stages 

HEAD T EAD T AAD T AID T AIL 

I will refer to these as the ‘ordered’ and ‘unordered’ cases respectively. An ENS interpretation would replace ‘valid word’ with ‘viable offspring’. Apath always exists in the unordered case but a path might not exist or be extremely long in the ordered case and paths in real fitness spaces are quite complex [Gavrilets, 1997]. We will examine both the ordered and unordered versions and for the ordered version consider the worst feasible case, where there only one viable path. 

> 2Invented by Lewis Carroll [Carroll, 2016]

63 Cumulative selection 

We solve the random and cumulative versions of the model for N = 1, ν = 0 in Appendix A. The basic result is the time to discovery T , the expected time it takes to land on a target sequence which has L characters different from the starting one is 

Trandom (L) = bL (1) 

Tordered (L) = Lp − (L − 1) (2) 

Tunordered (L) ≃ ln L + γp (3) Where γ is a constant and p = μb . For N > 1 the solution for the random search is 

Trandom (L, N ) = bL

N (4) The analytical solution of the cumulative search for N > 1 is harder, but computer simulation is simple and some plots are shown in Appendix A. The key observations are 1. The ordered search is exponentially faster than the random one. 2. The unordered search is exponentially faster than the ordered one. The ordered and unordered cases represent upper and lower bounds on the cumulative search time. In most situations we would expect more than one viable path e.g. using synonymous codons, but not for every path to be viable. However, even in the worst case, the ordered search only takes time linear in L compared to the exponential time for the random search. The upshot is that cumulative selection can, in a reasonable time, discover complex adaptations through random variation, even with a population of one .

## 3.1 Random Sampling 

Before discussing cumulative selection, it will be helpful to cover the non-cumulative version in more detail. Let N = 1 and take Dawkins’ example where b = 26. If we can afford one billion random trials we can expect to discover a sequence of length 

L = log T

log b ≃ 67The explosive exponential growth of the discovery time means that finding 

complex adaptations (here target sequences with large L) by random search is hopeless. An explanation of an adaptation that relies on its de novo 

emergence, a ‘hopeful monster’, is improbable. This cannot be evaded by having a large population. The size of the population is a multiplicative factor to the number of steps 

L = log( T N )log b

So, with a billion individuals doing a billion independent searches and b = 26 we can expect to find a sequence of length L = 12. Having many individ-uals is not enough to compensate for the huge times required to discover sequences of even moderate length. This also shows that small mutation rates in the cumulative models, where in the worst case T = Lb/μ , are not enough to give random searching an advantage for long sequences (see also Figures 1 and 2 in the Appendix). Mayr [1983] writes When one attempts to determine for a given trait whether it is the result of natural selection or of chance (the incidental byprod-uct of stochastic processes), one is faced by an epistemological dilemma. Almost any change in the course of evolution might have resulted by chance. Can one ever prove this? Probably never. In the lottery model where we can compute the probabilities ‘chance’, mean-ing saltational change where we match all characters at once, is so absurdly unlikely to generate a given complex trait that we can effectively rule it out as a valid explanation. The random and cumulative strategies are qualita-tively different. This point is why anthropic explanations [Smolin, 2007] are bad ones. In the biological realm this is relevant in at least two cases. First, in origin of life studies, we should not rely on the random appearance of complex life-like chemistry. Second, more relevant for the topic of this paper, the idea of ‘lucky Gaia’ [Watson, 2004] is unviable. Put simply, this is the proposal that the universe is quite old and there are a lot of planets, so one would be expect there to be suitable one by chance alone. Since there are roughly 10 12 stars in the Milky Way and evidence for at least one planet around each [Cassan et al., 2012] this large number would seem to make anything possible. However, as shown above, the complexity of what can be found 8through random, non-cumulative searching depends on the log of the pop-ulation and log 10 12 = 12 log 10 is not so big. Gaia, a planetary regulation system, consisting of interconnected biogeochemical cycles is surely quite complex. Even astronomically large numbers are not enough to ‘beat the log’ and simply having a very large number of planets is not a guarantee of winning the Gaian lottery. Rather than luck, we need mechanisms. It may be that there are many Gaian states, or Gaian states are ‘attractors’, or cumulative selection is operating, see Arthur and Nicholson [2022] for more discussion. In general, complex adaptations demand explanations that don’t depend on luck. 

## 3.2 Lewontin’s recipe 

Lewontin’s recipe [Lewontin, 1970] is 1. Different individuals in a population have different morphologies, phys-iologies, and behaviours (phenotypic variation) 2. Different phenotypes have different rates of survival and reproduction in different environments (differential fitness) 3. There is a correlation between parents and offspring in the contribution of each to future generations (fitness is heritable) These three principles embody the principle of evolution by nat-ural selection. While they hold, a population will undergo evo-lutionary change. These conditions are an abstraction of ENS and we want something similar for cumulative selection. It will be illustrative to consider how these conditions fail to apply to the cumulative lottery model and how we might modify them to do so. Lewontin’s first condition refers to ‘different individuals in a population’. While we can use many tickets, the lottery model has cumulative selection even using only one, as long as we can modify that ticket. Lewontin’s second condition refers to survival and reproduction. In the lottery model, it is irrelevant if, for each trial, the numbers on the current lottery ticket are copied to a new one or the same ticket is used with the incorrect numbers erased and replaced. Cumulative selection can occur in either case. Survival is replaced by persistence. For the unordered case, if there are k sites out of L matched the chances of at least one match in 9the next step is 1 − (1 − p)L−k, so a state with k + 1 correct letters will persist longer than a state with k. Different sequences have different rates of persistence. I use the term persistence, following Bouchard [2004], since survival implies that entities must be removed, which is not the case. Also unlike fitness, we can define persistence for systems without reproduction by simply looking at which states outlast others. So, rather than survival and reproduction in the lottery model, we have persistence of states. Lewontin’s third condition refers to heredity, and explicitly references reproduction and correlation between parents and offspring. For cumula-tive selection we need something analogous, which has been called ‘mem-ory’ [Charbonneau, 2014, Papale, 2021, Arthur and Nicholson, 2022]. Con-sider the lottery model where we allow correct characters to mutate, ‘back-mutation’, at a rate ν. For a site with a correct character the probability for it to remain correct in the next generation is 

r = (1 − ν) + νb

meaning either it doesn’t mutate, or it ‘mutates’ but to the correct character, for example a synonymous mutation that takes the character W to the character W . For very small ν everything remains the same, though now matched characters are very long lived, rather than immortal. However, if the probability of back-mutation is high then there is no persistence of state over time. There needs to be enough continuity for the process to actually be cumulative, we can’t build on previous matches if those matches are constantly being lost. In the lottery model we define the error threshold 

as the critical value νc above which there is no cumulative selection and the search becomes effectively random. This threshold is computed for the ordered and unordered models in Appendix A. Interestingly, in the ordered case it is independent of μ.We also want to distinguish cumulative selection from a progressive sieve 

[Neander, 1995b]. A progressive sieve is a cylinder divided along its length by a series of mesh grids that get finer and finer. Imagine pouring gravel or different sized beads in at the top. As the beads pass from top to bottom they would appear to be cumulatively selected, until only the smallest ones make it to the bottom. However it is unsatisfactory to call this cumulative 

selection since it is equivalent to single step selection using the final sieve. We are not interested in a process which filters a fixed population, rather we are interested in systems where variation is continually generated. 10 3.3 Cumulative selection 

I define cumulative selection as a random search process that can generate an adaptation in a ‘reasonable’ time by the accumulation of small changes. ‘Reasonable’ means if some fixed sized change takes time t, the discovery time T for an adaptation described by sequence of L smaller adaptations grows slower than exponentially in L, say, at worst like some small power k

of L. So a process with T ∼ O(Lk) is cumulative selection and T ∼ O(tL)is not 3.Consider an entity which is described by a set of features. The particular values of the features at some instant are the entity’s ‘state’. If 1. The features vary randomly over time 2. Different states have different rates of persistence 3. The rate of variation does not exceed the error threshold Then the entity is subject to cumulative selection on its features. We have to have variation otherwise there is nothing to select (1). We have to have different rates of persistence, otherwise there is nothing to select on (2). Variation has to be below the error threshold, otherwise the process cannot be cumulative (3). Thus the conditions are necessary. The model we constructed in Section 2 is based on only these assumptions and performs cumulative selection, so the conditions are also sufficient. These are our general conditions for cumulative selection to operate. To apply it to some particular system we have to specify the entity, features, state etc. It is also useful to give the explicandum, as in the lottery model where we have a target sequence and we are attempting to understand how it could be reached through random guessing of characters. As a first example we will recover Lewontin’s conditions and therefore standard ENS. The thing-to-be-explained is the prevalence of some phenotype among a group of individuals, say, the beak shape of some Gal´ apagos finches. The ‘entity’ here is a Darwinian population, a collection of individuals which perform interbreeding and reproductive competition [Godfrey-Smith, 2009]. The ‘features’ are the particular phenotypes of the individual members of that population and the ‘state’ is a list of the phenotypes of its members. If those phenotypes are quantitative (beak size) one could literally write down          

> 3For those unfamiliar, big-O notation, T∼O(x) means that for sufficiently large x,
> T≤M x for some fixed M[Black, 2019]. It is a convenient way to describe the asymptotic growth of functions.

11 the state as a list of numbers or, more usefully if the population size varies, summarize it through population level statistics like average beak size. Now the question is, does cumulative selection operate on such a system, and how exactly are the conditions satisfied in this case? Condition 1, 

features vary over time , is phenotypic variation, by the definition we just gave of a feature as an individual phenotype. In practice, variation is realised through chance mutations during reproduction. Condition 2 is differential persistence . Different states should have dif-ferent rates of persistence depending on their feature values. If small beaks are favoured, a state of 90% small beaks, will persist longer than a state with 50% small beaks. With a weak fitness advantage a > 0 for small beaks and discrete generations we have, for the change in small beak fraction x,∆x ≃ ax (1 −x) which decreases with increasing x > 0.5. The way that ‘state persistence’ is realised in practice is through survival and reproduction of individuals in the population, with the small beaked variety more likely to be ‘copied’ into the future state, so that states with large fractions of small beaks are more persistent. Condition 3 concerns the rate of variation. This is exactly what Godfrey-Smith [2009] refers to as the ‘error catastrophe’. While variation is required for change, it cannot be unbounded. If small beaks are more likely to sur-vive and reproduce, but the small beak trait is not reliably passed to the offspring, then the state will just bounce around rather than converge on a high fraction of small beaks. This is exactly what is meant by ‘correlation between parents and offspring’. Feature/phenotype variation is required for change, but too much and we cannot have cumulative change. This last, rather abstract seeming, condition is equivalent to requiring correla-tion between parents and offspring, and so is equivalent to Lewontin’s third condition. Since the conditions for cumulative selection in this system are equivalent to Lewontin’s recipe, evolution by natural selection is seen as a form of cumulative selection in Darwinian populations. 

# 4 Examples 

## 4.1 Negative examples 

The conditions in Section 3.3 encompass Lewontin’s recipe and thus evolu-tion by natural selection. What is more interesting to us are systems which are not Darwinian populations but do satisfy the conditions of 3.3. I will 12 give examples of such systems in the next Section but it is also useful to look at cases where the recipe does not hold. 1. If the entity is an individual organism, a fruit fly say, with genes as features then it passes conditions 2 and 3 but the genome is fixed, failing condition 1. 2. If the entity is a population with individuals that vary is a way which provides no advantage or disadvantage, say through variation in eye colour, then this passes conditions 1 and 3 but fails 2. Drift is not cumulative selection. I note however that drift can be cumulative 

[Brunet and Doolittle, 2018]. 3. The random search passes conditions 1 and 2 but fails condition 3. The first case is an idealisation, an individual genome can vary over time. Implicit in our, and Lewontin’s, conditions is that the entity in question, population or individual, does not go extinct. While environmental radia-tion could change the genes of an individual, this will likely kill it, so we don’t have an entity to perform cumulative selection with. Allowing for the possibility that variations can potentially end the game is sometimes important, see [Arthur and Nicholson, 2023b] for a concrete example. Another negative example is the progressive sieve. If the entity is taken to be an individual bead, there is no variation hence no cumulative selection (failing condition 1). If the entity is taken to be the whole collection of beads then there is no random variation (failing condition 1). Van Valen’s oft quoted example of granite weathering which preserves quartz crystals but dissolves feldspar and mica to create beaches [Van Valen, 1989] is, quite literally, a progressive sieve which has also been called weak ENS [Okasha, 2006, Bourrat, 2014]. With this in mind, consider Selection by Survival, the simplest form of which is “Natural selection in a contracting population of non-reproducing, non-competing, individuals” [Ford Doolittle, 2014]. Stated as such, this is an example of a progressive sieve, and not cumulative selection. However, the surviving individuals (Doolittle has something like biological clades in mind) are usually assumed to change over time. If the subject of cumula-tive selection is taken to be an individual clade and one of its features its diversity then 1. diversity varies randomly over (long enough) time through speciation 2. high diversity clades (likely) persist longer than low diversity ones and 3. a clade is, by definition, still the same clade regardless of the rate of variation. Thus clade diversity can be subject to cumulative selec-tion. Note, the fact that a progressive sieve is not an example of cumulative 13 selection does not mean such sieves don’t operate or have no observable effect, see [Arthur and Nicholson, 2023b] which explicitly studies a system with simultaneous sieving and cumulative selection. 

## 4.2 Positive examples 

Pando: Consider a large, long-lived, clonal organism such as the quaking aspen Pando. This is our entity. We map the discussion of Bouchard [2008] to our conditions. Let the features of Pando correspond to its ramets , in particular, their location. The state is the location of all the individual ramets, which we could summarise through the ‘shape’ of the grove and the density of trees. The ‘target’ or explicandum is the observed shape and density of Pando. The ramets vary in their location, with new ramets appearing at new locations over time through suckering from the main root system and old ramets dying (condition 1). Ramets at different locations are more or less persistent, due to soil conditions, vulnerability to grazing and so on (condi-tion 2). A ‘daughter’ can only grow 30-40m from a ‘mother’ ramet, which is small compared to the total size of Pando at about 40 hectares (condition 3). As the three conditions are satisfied, the shape and density of Pando are sub-ject to cumulative selection. Note that virtually identical arguments could be applied to any asexually reproducing species, as discussed by [Bouchard, 2004], since all members are, similarly to ramets, clones of their common ancestor. I note that if ramets could grow arbitrarily far away from their parents, we would still have a changing system, with ramets persisting longer depend-ing on where they ended up, however it would not be cumulative selection. An area of favourable soil might support higher density, but if the daughter ramets just popped up anywhere, they would be relying on luck to land in that patch and there would be no consistent increase in the density there over time as old trees die and their ‘offspring’ are not nearby to replace them. The exact transition between cumulative and non-cumulative selec-tion depending on the range of daughter ramets is an interesting question for investigation. 

Sex Ratio: The standard game theoretic argument for 50:50 sex ratios in dioecious species is the following [Hamilton, 1967]: If male births are less common, a newborn male has better mating prospects than a newborn female, therefore parents that have more male offspring have more grandchil-14 dren, spreading the genes for male production, reducing the male advantage. The same holds for a deficit of females. Therefore the system is only stable with an equal ratio of males and females. This is an individual level argument which is correct but we can describe the same situation in a different way. Let our ‘entity’ be a population and one of its features its sex ratio. This sex ratio varies randomly due to inherent variance in the numbers of births and deaths (condition 1). Variations close to 50:50 persist for longer than ones far from 50:50 (condition 2). Variations are relatively small i.e. we do not leap from a 10:90 ratio to 90:10 in one generation (condition 3). This means we could consider sex ratios subject to cumulative selection acting on a group. That is one group, not multiple competing groups with different sex-ratios. The individual argument is perfectly valid, but if we want to explain an intrinsically population level phenomenon, sex ratio, with a population level selection argument, in accord with Williams’s principle [Sober and Wilson, 2011], this is a way to do so. 

Gaia: Let the entity be Gaia, the coupled system of life and environment on Earth. In previous work [Arthur and Nicholson, 2022] we gave a de-tailed argument that the conditions for cumulative selection hold for Gaia. Here I present a different argument based on the famous DaisyWorld model [Watson and Lovelock, 1983]. The planetary albedo determines how much sunlight is reflected or absorbed, changing the planetary temperature. On DaisyWorld a white/black daisy reflects/absorbs sunlight cooling/heating the local environment and the planet by changing the albedo. A more real-istic model might consider cloud or forest cover instead of daisies. If the background temperature is hotter than ideal, the growth of black daisies is self-limited, they make it hotter so more black daisies makes it harder for any daisies to grow. White daisies on the other hand, cool, encouraging the growth of daisies. DaisyWorld tends to a ratio of black and white daisies which results in global temperatures close to the optimum for both species. Assuming a high background temperature on DaisyWorld: 1. Albedo varies due to random fluctuations in the birth/death of daisies 2. States with more black daisies (low albedo) do not persist as long as states with more white ones (high albedo) 3. The rate of reproduction of both daisy species is slow enough to avoid dramatic fluctuations in albedo 15 So albedo is a cumulatively selected feature of DaisyWorld. Notice the similarity to the sex ratio. In both cases there is a micro-scale description in terms of individual males/females or black/white daisies, and a macro-scale description in terms of cumulative selection acting on a feature of the macro-scale entity, the sex-ratio/albedo of a population/Gaia. The difference for Gaia is that the final ratio is not necessarily 50:50, but depends on the background temperature. This process is known as rein control [Harvey, 2004] since white and black daisies are ‘pulling’ temperature in opposite directions. Removing, say, white daisies gives single rein control. Black daisies raise the temper-ature above their optimal growth temperature, until it is high enough that their own reproduction is limited, with the temperature stabilizing at some value between the temperature for optimal growth and the upper limit for reproduction, corresponding to some equilibrium value of albedo Aeq . The second condition would then change to 2. States with albedo far from Aeq do not persist as long as states close to it This simple example shows that cumulative selection for persistence is not equivalent to optimizing reproduction or biomass. 

Neural Networks: Machine learning [Hastie et al., 2009] fits into this framework. In broad strokes, a machine learning task, like classifying images of dogs and cats, is translated into a ‘loss function’ L(y, ˆy) where y is the required output and ˆ y the prediction. The loss function is minimised by predictions, ˆ y, close to the truth y. A biologist might prefer to think of a fitness function F = −L which is maximised , the two are equivalent. A prediction algorithm is just a very flexible function f (x; s) = ˆ y which transforms inputs x into predictions ˆ y based on its state s. The state is typically specified by a very large set of parameters. In a neural network it is the weights and biases connecting the layers and controlling the activations of the neurons. One way of performing this optimisation is using stochastic gradient de-scent . The basic equation is 

s → s − η∇L

which means that the state s is updated by a small amount, η, in the di-rection of steepest descent, ∇L, over a large number of iterations. When the current state yields predictions which are far from optimal, the gradient 16 is large and the changes are large. When the state is close to optimal the gradient is small and the steps are small. The method is called stochastic 

because at each iteration only a random selection of training data is used to compute the gradient of the loss function. The entity is the neural network, the features are the model parameters and the state is the current set of parameter values 1. The update equation s → s − η∇L induces random variation in the parameters 2. States far from optimal (large losses) produce larger gradients. States close to optimal produce smaller ones. Exactly optimal features pro-duce zero gradients (though this is unlikely in practice). Thus a pa-rameter range si ± δs i closer to optimal is more persistent than one far from optimal. 3. The rate of variation is controlled by η, called the learning rate, which must be small and in fact, is often made to decrease as the optimum is approached. So this algorithm is performing cumulative selection on the parameters. 

## 4.3 Complexity 

Having this recipe allows us to be a bit more precise about what we mean by a ‘complex’ adaptation. There are many definitions of complexity [Adami, 2002], usually relating to the diversity or the number of parts of an entity and often quantified using information theory and compression [Nordin et al., 1995]. I will call this ‘structural complexity’. With any compression based measure of structural complexity the string 

AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA 

is less complex than the string 

M ET HIN KSIT ISLIKEAW EASEL. 

In the sequence model however, 

M ET HIN KSIT ISLIKEAW EASEL, AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA, 

17 and any other 23 character sequences are just as hard to find as one an-other. I will call an adaptation complex when a random search would take an unreasonably long time to discover it. To distinguish from structural complexity I call this ‘search complexity’. In the lottery model a random search takes time O(bL), unreasonably long for large L. For adaptation of a continuous parameter we can think of binning that parameter so that all values in a bin [ si, s i +δs i] are equivalently persistent, say, states in a bin persist to the same extent within some small range ±ϵ. If a large range of parameters is equivalent in persistence we don’t need many bins and so can find the best one quickly by random search. If only a very small range of parameters is maximally persistent we have many bins and it becomes very hard to find the right one at random. In this context we might call such an adaptation ‘fine-tuned’. The search complexity depends on where we start. If we have already matched 22 out of 23 characters, the final adaptation is not search complex, if we start from 0 it is, even though both targets can be equally structurally 

complex, or indeed, the same. Likewise, a continuous parameter that only needs to change slightly is not fine-tuned. I consider this initial condition dependence a desirable feature of the definition. It means a slight increase in limb length is not a complex adaptation, but evolving two limbs from no limbs certainly is! The magnitude of change and the timescale for making it matter when we are asking if an observation can be the result of a random process. Cumulative selection is a way that ‘search complex’ or fine-tuned adap-tations can be discovered in reasonably short times. However if persistence is a smooth function of state then, as the states are selected for persistence, the residence time in each state increases, slowing the approach to the target. In the unordered sequence model if there are L sites to match, the chance of at least one match is 1 − (1 − p)L, which decreases with decreasing L.For much more discussion on this slowing down as the target is approached, see [Arthur and Nicholson, 2022] and [Arthur and Nicholson, 2023a]. Mak-ing these arguments rigorous for continuous parameters would take us into the realm of stochastic calculus [Ewens and Ewens, 2004], which I leave for future work. I note that some authors [McShea and Brandon, 2010, Wong et al., 2023], have proposed growth in structural complexity as a fundamental law of na-ture. Despite arguing elsewhere that increasing structural complexity is important for Gaia Theory [Arthur and Nicholson, 2022, 2023a] increasing structural complexity is not an inevitable outcome of cumulative selection. If structurally complex states are increasingly persistent, structural complex-18 ity will be selected. This is what I argue holds for Gaia, but standard ENS provides examples where structural complexity is selected against. One ex-ample is genome-streamlining [Hessen et al., 2010], which reduces the length of DNA sequences. There is no contradiction, if shorter genomes persist bet-ter than longer ones they will be selected. Cumulative selection will discover structurally complex states only insofar as structural complexity increases persistence. 

# 5 Discussion 

This paper describes cumulative selection as a type of stochastic search that can generate complex adaptations in sub-exponential time by accumulation of persistence enhancing variation. I have given a general set of conditions for some entity to be subject to cumulative selection and a number of examples of situations which do and do not satisfy these conditions. I note that similar ideas have been advanced in the literature as Persis-tence Through Time [Bouchard, 2004], Selection by Survival [Ford Doolittle, 2014], Stability based Sorting [Toman and Flegr, 2017], ITSNTS [Doolittle and Inkpen, 2018], Sequential Selection [Lenton et al., 2018] and others. The key contribution differentiating this work is that I have provided a general-isation of Lewontin’s conditions, which describe the necessary and sufficient basis for a process called ‘cumulative selection’. ENS is a particular example of cumulative selection, but there are others. I contrast this with previous approaches which tend to either modify 

Lewontin’s recipe [Bouchard, 2004, Bourrat, 2014, Charbonneau, 2014, Pa-pale, 2021] or describe alternative processes [Ford Doolittle, 2014, Lenton et al., 2018]. The alternative processes are largely encompassed by this broader framework. The approaches modifying Lewontin’s conditions mostly concern generalised notions of reproduction while accepting the necessity of populations, and attempt to broaden ENS to encompass other examples of biological change. The approach of this paper is different. Rather than expand ENS I claim that what Pando and Gaia are doing is cumulative selection but is not ENS, with its standard Lewontian meaning. Moving from expanded ENS to cumulative selection is a simplification. Reproduction is reproduction, growth is growth, one does not have to en-compass the other (as in [Godfrey-Smith, 2009] for example). Defining the entity and studying how it varies allows us to determine if some adaptation can be plausibly explained by differential persistence. The particular exam-ples of the sex ratio and Daisyworld show that we can use this framework 19 to give a consistent macro-level description of a micro-level processes. Nei-ther description supersedes or invalidates the other. We can have ENS in a population of individuals or cumulative selection acting on a ‘feature’ of the group. This is a view on multilevel selection [Okasha, 2006] worth exploring in future work. I note that this recipe is very general - many processes of change can be argued to fit it. Thus, rather than the objections of Okasha [2006] and Bourrat [2014] that nothing interesting can be described by selection of persistence, perhaps too many processes can be described this way. However not all process of change are cumulative selection. I have already given some examples but another is the learning process. One does not learn French by speaking random gibberish to French people until they start to reply. Because of this I hesitate to use the term ‘learning’ or even ‘training’ as is common in ‘machine learning’. Instead I have chosen to follow Neander [1995b] and stick with the rather bland ‘cumulative selection’. On the subject of names, some authors are concerned that only if the language of ENS, ‘Darwinian selection’ and so forth, can be used will per-sistence based selection be seen as legitimate [Doolittle, 2024]. While this is already debatable [Arthur and Wilkinson, 2025], the generalised perspec-tive introduced here frees us from these semantic constraints. For example, in the many examples discussed, we are ‘selecting’ feature values of some entity. We happily ‘select’ the settings on smartphones, cameras and all kinds of devices without requiring a population of them. In this generalised framework we are not constrained by the language of ENS and forced to use unnatural constructions like ‘populations of one’. In summary, cumulative selection is a process of adaptation by random variation which encompasses not only evolution by natural selection but other interesting biological and even technological processes of change. Ihope that this work provides clarity and further impetus for its study. 

# Acknowledgements 

Thanks to Arwen Nicholson and David Wilkinson for their helpful comments on the manuscript. [suppressed for peer review] 

# A Model Solutions 

We consider sequences of L characters from an alphabet of size b. There are N active sequences si and some target sequence sT . Each of the N

20 sequences is subject to some kind of random variation every time step and we are concerned with how long it takes one of these sequences to reach the target. 

## A.1 Random Sequences 

Let us first consider the non-cumulative version of the model. At each step we randomly generate N new sequences si. The previously discovered letters are lost, and the only way to discover the target is all at once. Arandom sequence has a 1 

> bL

chance of matching the target, so N independent sequences have probability of matching the target equal to 

p(N ) = NbL (5) Using a standard trick we either match on the first trial or fail the first trial and match in the expected number of trials, since this is a memoryless process. This gives 

T = p + (1 − p)( T + 1) (6) 

T = 1 /p = bL

N

trials on average. For N = 1 we have T = bL.

## A.2 Cumulative Search 

Now consider a cumulative search with a population N = 1. At each step we reproduce each character from the previous step with a probability μ to change a character that doesn’t match with the target and a probability ν

to change a matching character. For simplicity we set ν = 0 at first, so that once a character is matched it stays fixed. Call the expected number of generations needed to match n characters in the target T (n). T (0) = 0 by definition. P (n, k ) is the probability of making k matches in n positions. The expected number of trials required to match n > 1 characters is at least 1, since we have to do at least one new trial; plus the chance of matching no characters multiplied by the wait time to match n, P (n, 0) T (n); plus the chance of matching one character times the remaining wait time to match n − 1, P (n, 1) T (n − 1) and so on up to 

P (n, n )T (0) = 0 the, very unlikely, case where we match all the characters in the next turn. 

T (n) = 1 + 

> n

X

> k=0

P (n, k )T (n − k) (7) 21 For the unordered case 

P (n, k ) = 

nk



pkqn−k (8) where p is the chance of success at a single site and q = 1 − p. When mutation happens at a site with probability μ and there is a probability 1 /b 

to choose the right character we have 

p = μb (9) For the ordered case we have the same p and 

P (n, k ) = pkq (10) meaning we find exactly k matches in order, then fail at the ( k + 1) th .

## A.3 Ordered Solution 

When the matching characters must be discovered in order, from left to right say, we can solve the recurrence exactly. First move all the T (n) terms to the left 

T (n) = 1 + 

> n

X

> k=0

pkqT (n − k) (11) = 1 + T (n)q + q

> n

X

> k=1

pkT (n − k) (12) (1 − q)T (n) = 1 + q

> n

X

> k=1

pkT (n − k) (13) Define the difference operator (similar to a discrete derivative) 

D(n) = T (n) − T (n − 1) (14) and compute (1 − q)( T (n) − T (n − 1)) to give (1 − q)D(n) = q

> n−2

X

> k=1

pkD(n − k) + qp n−2 (15) 22 using T (1) = 1 /p . We attempt a solution where D(n) = D for n ≥ 2

D(1 − q) = Dq 

> n−2

X

> k=1

pk + qp n−2 (16) (17) Using the identity 

> n−2

X

> k=1

pk = p(1 − pn−2)1 − p (18) gives 

D(1 − q) = Dq p(1 − pn−2)1 − p + qp n−2 (19) which simplifies to 

D = qp (20) Using this, D(1) = 1 /p and T (L) = PLn=1 D(n) gives 

T (L) = 

> L

X

> n=2

D(n) + D(1) (21) = ( L − 1) qp + 1

p (22) = (L − 1) − p(L − 1) + 1 

p (23) = Lp − (L − 1) (24) which is the naive expectation where we simply wait for every term inde-pendently, giving Lp , with a small correction to account for when we happen to get more than one character correct at a time. 

## A.4 Unordered Solution 

When the correct characters can be found in any order, the recurrence is quite difficult to solve. It can be rearranged into different forms, but what we really want is the dependence of T on L. We can approximate it by 23 considering the state when there are d characters remaining. The probability of finding the target in the next generation is pL−d, if we don’t allow back mutation. Assuming μ is small, the probability of getting multiple correct characters in a single generation can be neglected. The probability of any of the d remaining positions matching in the next generation is then dp .This means we wait τ (d) = 1 

> dp

generations to make one match when d

matches are needed. To match all the remaining entries, starting from L

missing, we therefore have to wait 

T (L) = 

> L

X

> d=0

τ (d) = 1

p

> L

X

> d=0

1

d (25) We have LX

> d=0

1

d = HL (26) Where HL is the Lth harmonic number. A standard and very accurate approximation even for small L is HL ≃ ln L + γ where γ = 0 .5772156649 ... 

is the Euler-Mascheroni constant. Therefore 

T (L) ≃ (ln L + γ)

p (27) The key thing is that the time is logarithmic in L. This is much faster than the ordered case which is linear in L, for example if L = 10 9 then ln(10 9) = 9 ln 10 ≃ 21. 

## A.5 N > 1

The solutions for N > 1 involve choosing the maximum matching sequence among N instances which is somewhat more complicated to analyse and does not really add a huge amount to our story. Figure 1 shows some simulations of the process for N = 1 confirming our analysis, in particular the accuracy of the approximations made. Figure 2 shows some examples of N > 1 making the basic point from the text that for small L and large 

N the random search can be faster than the cumulative one, but at larger 

L the order always switches for any N .

## A.6 Error Threshold 

We now consider what happens in the cumulative model if, when a match is found, there is a small probability ν to lose it. The probability to keep a 24 Figure 1: Simulations of the cumulative search process for N = 1 compared to the analytical results above. Using ν = 0 , μ = 0 .1, b = 4. Each point averages over 200 searches. 25 Figure 2: Simulations of the cumulative search process for N > 1 using 

ν = 0 , μ = 0 .1, b = 4. Each point averages 200 searches. correct match is the probability to not mutate or the probability to mutate, but for that mutation to reproduce the correct character, 

r = (1 − ν) + νb (28) The goal is to find the value of ν = νc where the rate of this ‘back mutation’ is high enough that cumulative selection is impossible. 

A.6.1 Unordered 

For the unordered case we can treat every entry independently. Let π be the probability the site is correct in the long term. At this stationary point we have a balance between the probability of transitioning away from the correct value and the probability of transitioning to it. Recall ν is the the probability to mutate a fixed entry and μ is the probability to mutate an unfixed one. The probability to go from an incorrect state to a correct one is (1 − π) μb (29) 26 The probability to go from a correct to an incorrect is 

π(1 − r) (30) These balance at stationarity 

π(1 − r) = (1 − π) μb (31) 

π = 

> μbν(b−1)
> b

+ μb

(32) The probability for L sites to be correct at stationarity is πL with waiting time π−L. The exponent can be offset only if π is sufficiently large. Using the expansion exp( −x) ≃ (1 − x) for small x note that if π ∼ 1 − (1 /L ) then 

π−L ∼ 1 

> e

which is a ‘reasonable’ wait time. Thus to find the sequence in reasonable time requires 

π ≥ 1 − (1 /L ) (33) or solving for the critical value of νc

νc = μb − 11

L − 1 (34) The rate of back mutation can’t be higher than the rate of forward mutation divided by the the alphabet size and target length. 

A.6.2 Ordered 

Let the random variable X be the length of the prefix in the next generation. The tail-sum formula for the expectation of X is 

E[X] = X

> i≥1

P (X ≥ i) (35) If the current prefix is of length m, then for i ≤ m, P (X ≥ i) = ri and for 

i > m , P (X ≥ i) = rmpm−i.

E[X] = 

> m

X

> i≥1

ri + rmL−mX

> i=1

pi

We need the prefix to eventually be of length L, so the second term vanishes and in the limit of large L the first term is approximately r 

> 1−r

. If expected 27 length is less than L then a prefix this long cannot be sustained due to the rate of back mutation in which implies 

r

1 − r < L 

Solving for νc gives 

νc = 1

L + 1 

 bb − 1



This just depends on L with a very weak dependence on b and no dependence on μ.

## A.7 Complicating the model 

There are various ways we could make this model more realistic 

Fixation Time: We are interested in the search time, but we could also consider the time spent copying numbers onto N new lottery tickets, or, in the genetic case, for the mutation to become ubiquitous in a population. This depends on the selective advantage of the mutation. In standard pop-ulation genetic models the fixation time scales like log N for a beneficial mutation or like N for a neutral mutation [Ewens and Ewens, 2004]. Taking the worst case, we could add a factor proportional to N to the total time for every generation. This creates a tension between search time (faster for large N ) and fixation time (slower for large N ) where some optimum N

could be found. The back mutation rate ν could be framed in a similar way, as a combination of a baseline mutation probability and purifying selection against back mutation. This kind of extension is beyond the scope of what we want to do since we are mostly interested in the case N = 1. 

Continuous variables: Using a fixed alphabet is natural when considering a sequence of genetic bases or amino acids and makes the analysis much sim-pler. However we will also consider states which are specified by continuous parameters like size or latitude. We can make continuous variables discrete by binning them, measuring a parameter s in increments of δs . A much more mathematically interesting approach would be to model this situation as a diffusion process [Ewens and Ewens, 2004], but this is beyond the scope of this paper. 28 Variable sized alphabets and sequences: On the other extreme, for something like the nitrogen cycle, the letters of the sequence could be bi-nary variables indicating the presence/absence of a chemical species. We could also allow each letter to be chosen from a different alphabet e.g. con-sonants in the first position, vowels in the second and so forth. We could allow the sequences to get longer and shorter by inserting or deleting letters with some probability. 

Complex targets: In case the reader is concerned that the sequence model is aiming at a predetermined target, this is simply to make the model easy to understand. If any sequence of 23 letters that made a sensible English phrase were permitted as a target this would make the ‘persistence land-scape’ more interesting, but much more difficult to analyse. As already mentioned we are solving the inverse problem: is it plausible that the ob-served target could be found by a random process? Alternatively, in the forward direction, we could consider the target sequence as representing a single peaked ‘fitness landscape’, which is an approximation to a real system over a relatively short time-scale or describes selective breeding [Arthur and Sibani, 2017]. Rather than pursue reality, we consider here a tractable toy model, meant to display cumulative selection in the simplest possible setting and don’t consider these and other possible extensions. 

# References 

Christoph Adami. What is complexity? BioEssays , 24(12):1085–1094, 2002. Rudy Arthur and Arwen Nicholson. Selection principles for gaia. Journal of Theoretical Biology , 533:110940, 2022. Rudy Arthur and Arwen Nicholson. Does gaia play dice? simple models of non-darwinian selection. AstroBiology , 23(11):1238–1244, 2023a. Rudy Arthur and Arwen Nicholson. A gaian habitable zone. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society , 521(1):690–707, 2023b. Rudy Arthur and Paolo Sibani. Decision making on fitness landscapes. 

Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications , 471:696–704, 2017. 29 Rudy Arthur and David Wilkinson. Does Gaia need to be Dar-winized. Philosophy, Theory, and Practice in Biology , 2025. URL 

https://journals.publishing.umich.edu/ptpbio/ . forthcoming. Paul E. Black. ”big-o notation”. in Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Structures [online], Vadim Okun, ed., September 6 2019. URL https://www.nist.gov/dads/HTML/bigOnotation.html . Ac-cessed: 2026-01-12. Fr´ ed´ eric Bouchard. Evolution, fitness and the struggle for persistence . Duke University, 2004. Fr´ ed´ eric Bouchard. Causal processes, fitness, and the differential persistence of lineages. Philosophy of science , 75(5):560–570, 2008. Fr´ ed´ eric Bouchard. Darwinism without populations: a more inclusive un-derstanding of the “survival of the fittest”. Studies in History and Philos-ophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences , 42(1):106–114, 2011. Fr´ ed´ eric Bouchard. Ecosystem evolution is about variation and persistence, not populations and reproduction. Biological Theory , 9(4):382–391, 2014. Pierrick Bourrat. From survivors to replicators: evolution by natural selec-tion revisited. Biology & Philosophy , 29(4):517–538, 2014. Pierrick Bourrat. A pricean formalization of gaia. Philosophy of Science , 90 (3):704–720, 2023. Eric Bricker, Ainsley Calladine, Robert Virnstein, and Michelle Waycott. Mega clonality in an aquatic plant—a potential survival strategy in a changing environment. Frontiers in Plant Science , 9:435, 2018. TDP Brunet and W Ford Doolittle. The generality of constructive neutral evolution. Biology & Philosophy , 33(1):2, 2018. Donald E Canfield, Alexander N Glazer, and Paul G Falkowski. The evo-lution and future of earth’s nitrogen cycle. science , 330(6001):192–196, 2010. Lewis Carroll. Doublets-A Word-Puzzle . Read Books Ltd, 2016. Arnaud Cassan, Daniel Kubas, J-P Beaulieu, Martin Dominik, K Horne, J Greenhill, J Wambsganss, John Menzies, Andrew Williams, Uffe Gr˚ ae 30 Jørgensen, et al. One or more bound planets per milky way star from microlensing observations. Nature , 481(7380):167–169, 2012. Mathieu Charbonneau. Populations without reproduction. Philosophy of Science , 81(5):727–740, 2014. Richard Dawkins. The Extended Phenotype: The Gene as the Unit of Se-lection . Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 1982. Richard Dawkins. The Blind Watchmaker: Why the Evidence of Evolution Reveals a Universe Without Design . W. W. Norton & Company, New York, 1986. Theodosius Dobzhansky. Genetics and the Origin of Species . Columbia University Press, New York, NY, 1st edition, 1937. W Ford Doolittle. Making the most of clade selection. Philosophy of science ,84(2):275–295, 2017. W Ford Doolittle. Darwinizing Gaia: natural selection and multispecies community evolution . MIT Press, 2024. W Ford Doolittle and Austin Booth. It’s the song, not the singer: an exploration of holobiosis and evolutionary theory. Biology & Philosophy ,32(1):5–24, 2017. W Ford Doolittle and S Andrew Inkpen. Processes and patterns of interac-tion as units of selection: An introduction to itsnts thinking. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 115(16):4006–4014, 2018. Warren John Ewens and WJ Ewens. Mathematical population genetics: theoretical introduction , volume 27. Springer, 2004. W Ford Doolittle. Natural selection through survival alone, and the possi-bility of gaia. Biology & Philosophy , 29(3):415–423, 2014. Sergey Gavrilets. Evolution and speciation on holey adaptive landscapes. 

Trends in ecology & evolution , 12(8):307–312, 1997. Peter Godfrey-Smith. Darwinian populations and natural selection . Oxford University Press, 2009. Stephen Jay Gould. The structure of evolutionary theory . Harvard university press, 2002. 31 Stephen Jay Gould and Richard C. Lewontin. The spandrels of san marco and the panglossian paradigm: a critique of the adaptationist programme. 

Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sci-ences , 205(1161):581–598, sep 1979. ISSN 0080-4649. doi: 10.1098/r-spb.1979.0086. William D Hamilton. Extraordinary sex ratios: A sex-ratio theory for sex linkage and inbreeding has new implications in cytogenetics and entomol-ogy. Science , 156(3774):477–488, 1967. Inman Harvey. Homeostasis and rein control: From daisyworld to active perception. In Proceedings of the ninth international conference on the simulation and synthesis of living systems, ALIFE , volume 9, pages 309– 314, 2004. Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman. The Ele-ments of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction .Springer Series in Statistics. Springer, New York, NY, 2nd edition, 2009. ISBN 978-0-387-84857-0. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-84858-7. URL 

https://hastie.su.domains/ElemStatLearn/ .Dag O Hessen, Punidan D Jeyasingh, Maurine Neiman, and Lawrence J Weider. Genome streamlining and the elemental costs of growth. Trends in ecology & evolution , 25(2):75–80, 2010. Timothy M Lenton, Stuart J Daines, James G Dyke, Arwen E Nicholson, David M Wilkinson, and Hywel TP Williams. Selection for gaia across multiple scales. Trends in Ecology & Evolution , 33(8):633–645, 2018. Richard C Lewontin. The units of selection. Annual review of ecology and systematics , pages 1–18, 1970. Julius Lukeˇ s, John M Archibald, Patrick J Keeling, W Ford Doolittle, and Michael W Gray. How a neutral evolutionary ratchet can build cellular complexity. IUBMB life , 63(7):528–537, 2011. Ernst Mayr. How to carry out the adaptationist program? The American Naturalist , 121(3):324–334, 1983. Daniel W McShea and Robert N Brandon. Biology’s first law: the tendency for diversity and complexity to increase in evolutionary systems . Univer-sity of Chicago Press, 2010. 32 Karen Neander. Explaining complex adaptations: A reply to sober’s ‘reply to neander’. The British journal for the philosophy of science , 46(4):583– 587, 1995a. Karen Neander. Pruning the tree of life. The British Journal for the Phi-losophy of Science , 46(1):59–80, 1995b. Peter Nordin, Wolfgang Banzhaf, et al. Complexity compression and evolu-tion. In ICGA , pages 310–317, 1995. F John Odling-Smee, Kevin N Laland, and Marcus W Feldman. Niche construction. The American Naturalist , 147(4):641–648, 1996. Samir Okasha. Evolution and the levels of selection . Clarendon Press, 2006. Fran¸ cois Papale. Evolution by means of natural selection without repro-duction: revamping lewontin’s account. Synthese , 198(11):10429–10455, 2021. Rozenn M Pineau, Karen E Mock, Jesse Morris, Vachel Kraklow, Andrea Brunelle, Aurore Pageot, William C Ratcliff, and Zachariah Gompert. Mosaic of somatic mutations in earth’s oldest living organism, pando. 

bioRxiv , 2024. Lee Smolin. Scientific alternatives to the anthropic principle. Universe or multiverse , 21:323–366, 2007. Elliott Sober. The Nature of Selection: Evolutionary Theory in Philosophical Focus . MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1984. Elliott Sober. Natural selection and distributive explanation: A reply to neander. The British journal for the philosophy of science , 46(3):384–397, 1995. Elliott Sober and David Sloan Wilson. Adaptation and natural selection revisited. Journal of Evolutionary Biology , 24(2):462–468, 2011. Arlin Stoltzfus. On the possibility of constructive neutral evolution. Journal of molecular evolution , 49(2):169–181, 1999. Claudio Tennie, Josep Call, and Michael Tomasello. Ratcheting up the ratchet: on the evolution of cumulative culture. Philosophical Transac-tions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences , 364(1528):2405–2415, 2009. 33 Jan Toman and Jaroslav Flegr. Stability-based sorting: The forgotten pro-cess behind (not only) biological evolution. Journal of theoretical biology ,435:29–41, 2017. Leigh M Van Valen. Three paradigms of evolution. Evolutionary theory , 9 (2):1–17, 1989. A. J. Watson. Gaia and observer self-selection. In Stephen H. Schnei-der, James R. Miller, Eileen Crist, and Penelope J. Boston, edi-tors, Scientists Debate Gaia: The Next Century , pages 201–208. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2004. ISBN 9780262283182. doi: https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/9780262194983.001.0001. Andrew J Watson and James E Lovelock. Biological homeostasis of the global environment: the parable of daisyworld. Tellus B: Chemical and Physical Meteorology , 35(4):284–289, 1983. Michael L Wong, Carol E Cleland, Daniel Arend Jr, Stuart Bartlett, H James Cleaves, Heather Demarest, Anirudh Prabhu, Jonathan I Lu-nine, and Robert M Hazen. On the roles of function and selection in evolving systems. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 120 (43):e2310223120, 2023. Mingjun Zhang and Xingyi Li. Defending the importance of lineage-forming reproduction in evolution by natural selection. Biology & Philosophy , 40 (1):5, 2025. 34