Title: 2602.23624v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.23624v1

Published Time: Mon, 02 Mar 2026 01:20:41 GMT

Number of Pages: 31

Markdown Content:
1

# Sex chromosome stability and turnover 

# across vertebrates : a developmental gene 

# regulatory network perspective 

Wen -Juan Ma 1†, Ricard Fontser è1, Tristan Cornelis 1, Paris Veltsos 1, Qi Zhou 2,3,4 

1. Research Group of Ecology, Evolution and Genetics, Biology Department, Vrije Universiteit 

Brussel, Brussels, Belgium 

2. Center for Reproductive Medicine, Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University School of 

Medicine, Life Sciences Institute, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 

3. Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Molecular Cancer Biology, Life Sciences Institute, Zhejiang 

University, Hangzhou, China 

4. State Key Laboratory of Transvascular Implantation Devices, Hangzhou, China 

> †

Correspondence: 

wen -juan.ma@vub.be 2

# Abstract 

Sex chromosomes have evolved repeatedly across the Tree of Life , yet their evolutionary fates differ 

strikingly among lineages. In mammals and birds, ancient XY and ZW systems with highly degenerated 

Y/W chromosomes have remained stable for >100 Myr, whereas in most amphibians, many teleosts, 

non -avian reptiles and flowering plants, sex chromosomes remain largely homomorphic and are 

frequently replaced (i.e. undergo turnover ). Classical explanations for th is contrast , includ ing the 

evolutionary trap hypothesis, sexually antagonistic selection , mutation load accumulation , genetic drift 

and self ish genetic elements , focus on population genetic processes and do not fully explain why 

turnover is so common in some clades but apparently absent in others. Here we develop a 

complementary developmental perspective and propose the sex determination developmental gene 

regulatory network (GRN ) lock -in hypothesis. We compile case studies of sex chromosome turnover 

across vertebrates and synthesise comparative developmental data on sex determination . I n therian 

mammals and birds, sex is determined by an early , initiation by somatic cells , fully penetrant genetic 

master signal ( Sry regulation of Sox 9 or Dmrt 1 dosage) acting within a narrow, thermally buffered 

embryo nic window . This signal operates within highly canalised GRNs , coupled to chromosome -scale 

dosage compensation , with alternative splicing events playing little or no causal role in primary sex 

determination . This configuration makes it difficult for new sex -determining loci to invade without 

creating deleterious intermediate states. By contrast, many ectothermic vertebrates possess more 

flexible, integrative “threshold” GRNs in which genetic, epigeneti c, germ -cell and environmental inputs 

interact over a prolonged sensitive period, with absent or largely gene -by -gene based dosage 

compensation and environment ally -responsive splicing near key regulatory nodes, providing many 

entry points for new master sex -determining genes to evolve . We outline empirical predictions of this 

framework and highlight how integrating developmental biology, molecular mechanisms and 

population g enetics can yield testable models for when sex chromosomes become evolutionarily 

locked -in versus when they turnover repeatedly. 

# Keywords: 

Sex chromosome turnover, sex chromosome degeneration, vertebrates, developmental gene regulatory 

network lock -in , Sertoli cell, dosage compensation, alternative splicing 3

# 1. Sex chromosome turnover across vertebrates : concept s, patterns and 

# proposed mechanisms 

Sex chromosomes, which usually carry the master sex -determining gene , have independently 

evolved many times across the Tree of Life (Bachtrog et al., 2014; Ma & Rovatsos, 2022; Peichel, 

2017a; Veltsos et al., 2024; Vicoso, 2019; Wilson Sayres, 2018) . They follow strikingly different 

evolutionary trajectories in different lineages. In mammals and birds, sex chromosomes are deeply 

conserved and sex -limited chromosomes (i.e. Y or W) are highly degenerated with many functional 

genes having become lost , whereas in most amphibians, many teleost fishes, non -avian reptiles and 

flowering plants they remain larg ely homomorphic . One explanation for homomorphy is frequent sex 

chromosome turnover , i.e. replacement or reconfiguration of sex chromosomes among closel y related 

taxa (El Taher et al., 2021; Furman et al., 2020; Gamble et al., 2015; Jeffries et al., 2018; Lubieniecki 

et al., 2015; Ma & Veltsos, 2021; Saunders, 2019; Tennessen et al., 2017; Vicoso, 2019) . There are 

three types of sex chromosome turnover (Saunders, 2019; Veltsos et al., 2024) : i) trans -heterogamety 

transition s: switches between male (XX/XY) and female (ZW/ZZ) heterogamet ic sex chromosome 

systems . ii) heterologous cis -heterogamety transitions : changes of the sex chromosome pair within the 

same heterogametic system (e.g. from one XY or ZW pair to another). iii) homologous cis -

heterogamety transitions : changes in the identity or position of the master sex -determining gene on the 

same Y or W. 

Several non -exclusive evolutionary forces have been proposed to drive rapid sex chromosome 

turnover (Saunders, 2019; Vicoso, 2019) . i) Sexually antagonistic selecti on model: newly evolved sex -

determining alleles linked to sexually antagonistic loci (beneficial to one sex but deleterious to the 

other) would have an indirect fitness advantage (Van Doorn & Kirkpatrick, 2007, 2010) . This model 

could drive turnovers mediated by novel masculinising or feminising mutations and predicts roughly 

equal rates between XY and ZW transitions. ii) Deleterious mutation l oad model: As recombination is 

suppressed around the sex -determining region , deleterious mutations would accumulate on the non -

recombining Y/W chromosomes. Replacing the old sex chromosomes while keeping the same 

heterogametic sex allows for loss of the mutation -loaded Y or W, favouring cis -transitions (Blaser et 

al., 2012) . iii) Genetic drift model : new sex -determining alleles can drift to fixation, especially in small 

populations. Theory predicts that turnovers that retain the same heterogametic sex (cis transitions) 

should occur 2 –4 times more often than switches between XY and ZW systems (Saunders et al., 2018; 

Veller et al., 2017) . iv) Sex -ratio selection model: meiotic drive or biased inheritance of sex 

chromosomes can skew sex ratios. Selection may then favour alternative sex -determining systems that 

restore balanced sex ratios, potentially promoting transitions between XY and ZW systems (Kozielska 

et al., 2010; Werren & Beukeboom, 1998) .

There are two possible proximate genetic mechanism s for sex chromosome turnover (Dufresnes 

et al., 2025; Jeffries et al., 2018; Kabir et al., 2022; Tennessen et al., 2017) . First, the master sex -

determining gene or region can be translocated to a different chromosom e, for example via 

chromosomal rearrangements or transposable elements. The mechanism has been identified in only few 

cases such as in takifugu pufferfish (Kabir et al., 2022) , strawberry (Tennessen et al., 2017) and salmonid 

fish (Phillips, 2013) . Second, mutations at a downstream gene of the sex -determining pathway can 

acquire a master sex -determining role . This mechanism underlying sex chromosome turnover has been 

only directly supported in the European toads by far (Dufresnes et al., 2025) . Therefore, the molecular 

pathways by which new master sex -determining gene s arise and spread remain poorly characterised .

Sex chromosome turnover has been documented in many teleost fishes, amphibians, and non -

avian reptiles, as well as flowering plants and some insect lineages , but it appears very rare in mammals, 

birds and several other insect groups (Behrens et al., 2024; Dufresnes et al., 2015; Furman & Evans, 4

2016; Jeffries et al., 2018; Kabir et al., 2022; Kitano & Peichel, 2012; Nielsen et al., 2019; Ross et al., 

2009; Sessions et al., 2016; Stöck et al., 2013; Tennessen et al., 2017; Vicoso, 2019; Xue et al., 2024; 

Yoshida et al., 2014) . Meta -analyses across vertebrate species show that sex chromosome turnover 

between XY to ZW systems occur at similar rates in amphibians and squamates, whiles transitions to 

XY system occur at higher rates in fishes (Pennell et al., 2018) . In our non -exhaustive compil ation of 

case studies on sex chromosome turnover (not including sex chromosome -autosome fusion events) 

across vertebrates, 61% ( 28 /46) concern fishes, 22% (10/ 46) amphibians and 15% (7/46) non -avian 

reptiles , whereas we found 2% (1/4 6) in a single mammal example (the spiny rat To kudaia osimensis )

and no example in birds (0, Supplementary Table S1) . Reported turnover events span at least 17 families 

in fishes, 27 in non -avian reptiles, 6 in amphibians, 1 in mammals and 0 in birds. Among the fastest 

empirically estimated sex chromosome turnover rate s so far are ~0.259 turnovers per My r in cichlid 

fish es from L ake Tanganyika , that means on average one sex chromosome turnover event is expected 

between two species that diverged ~2.7 Myo , and at least 13 turnover events occur among 28 ranid true 

frogs (family Ranidae) within ~50 Myr divergence (El Taher et al., 2021; Jeffries et al., 2018) .     

> Figure 1 .(A) Schematic illustrating the main types of sex -chromosome turnover. (B) Phylogenetic distribution
> and frequency of reported sex -chromosome turnover across vertebrate families (mammals, birds, amphibians and
> teleost fishes). The phylogenetic tree is obtained from timetree.org . For each family we summarised the number
> of inferred turnover events and the number of species with characterised sex chromosomes reported in the
> literature. Asterisks (*) indicate cases where only higher -level taxa (e.g. order or sub order ) could be scored
> because family -level resolution was not available. “NA” denotes lineages in which no turnover has been reported

5  

> to date, with the exception of the spiny rat Tokudaia osimensis among mammals. Underlying data and references
> are listed in Supplementary Table S1.

A long -standing class of explanations behind the long -term stability of sex chromosome 

systems is the “evolutionary trap” hypothesi s, which emphasises constra int s caused by degeneration of 

the sex -limited chromosome s (Y/W ). Once recombination is suppressed around the master sex -

determining locus, Y/W chromosomes accumulate repetitive DNA , specialised regulatory features and 

even gene loss . Consequently, evolving a new master sex -determining locus on a different chromosome 

is expected to generate maladaptive intermediates (e.g. unbalanced gene dosage, disrupted meiotic 

pairing, reduced fertility) and may expose the deleterious effects of YY or WW genotypes 

(Charlesworth, 2021a; Pokorná & Kratochvíl, 2009) . Degen eration alone cannot account for the 

observed diversity of sex chromosome dynamics. S ome lineages with relatively undifferentiated sex 

chromosomes show little or no evidence of turnover , whereas others , including several teleost and 

reptile clades , show repeated changes in sex chromosomes despite clear Y/W degeneration (Darolti et 

al., 2019; Kitano & Peichel, 2012; Nielsen et al., 2019; M. Rovatsos et al., 2019; Vicoso, 2019) .

Moreover, m eta -analyses across vertebrates do not strongly support a simple “ evolutionary trap ”: 

estimated turnover rates are similar for homomo rphic and heteromorphic systems in both fish es and 

amphibians (Pennell et al., 2018) .

These contrasts indicate that degeneration and the classical evolutionary forces above are only 

part of a broader picture. Comparative developmental and transcriptomic data point to an additional 

dimension: the architecture and dynamics of the sex determination developmental gene regulatory 

network (GRN ). In mammals and birds, alternative splicing of certain factors (e.g. Wt1, Fgfr 2, Lef1 ) is 

extensive and functionally important, but current evidence places these splice decisions in non -essential 

node and plays little role in affecting transcriptionally defined master switch initiated with in the 

germline somatic cells (Sry→Sox9 or Dmrt 1 dosage) , which operates in a narrow embryonic window 

in the thermally buffered endothermic embryos (Gómez -Redondo et al., 2021; Hammes et al., 2001; 

Ioannidis et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2007; Zhao et al., 2018) . By contrast, in many ectothermic vertebrates 

with labile sex determination, alternative splicing acts much closer to the sex determination decision 

point and is directly modulated by temperature or other external cues . For example , in reptiles with 

temperature sex determination , Rbm20 (RNA binding motif protein 20) control s Wt1 isoforms for male 

pathway development and splicing of Kdm6b/ Jarid2 could lead to temperature -induced sex rever sals ,

or in sex -changing fishes it affects environmentally responsive Dm rt1 and Cyp19a1a isoforms 

(Domingos et al., 2018; Ge et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2025; Whiteley et al., 2022) .

In this review, we propose the developmental gene -regulatory network (GRN) lock -in 

hypothesis to account for the e xceptional stab ility of sex chromosomes in therian mammals and birds .

We argu e a combination of interacting factors related to sex determination (SD) can discourage the 

evolution of alternative sex -deter mining loci , and thus sex chromosome turnover, in therian mammals 

and birds , making it hig hly unlikely . These factors include a single, early -acting master sex -determining 

gene that acts unidirectionally within a narrow developmental window , functioning as a fully penetrant 

signal in a thermally buffered endothermic embryo . Additional factors causing developmental GRN 

lock -in are the result of co -evol ution with the evolutionary stable sex chromosomes , such as dosage 

compensation and alternative splicing . Finally, the network properties of the sex determination 

developmental GRN can also affect the possibility of sex chromosome turnover. The developmental 

GRNs have the bottom -up architecture involving multiple threshold s acting over a broader sensitive 

embryonic period , affected by genetic, epigenetic and environmental inputs, with alternative splicing 

operating at or near key regulatory nodes of many ectothermic vertebrates allow for frequent and rapid 

sex chromosome turnover. 6

# 2. Developmental gene regulatory networks: a neglected dimension of sex 

# chromosome evolution 

Much of the genetics of sex determination has been shaped by the mammalian model, in which 

sex determination is often treated as synonymous to the action of a single master sex -determining gene .

By contrast, work in fishes, amphibians, reptiles and plants shows that sex determination can involve 

multiple genetic, epigenetic and environmental inputs, acting at different positions and times within the 

GRN. These differences in how the network is w ired and regulated may strongly influence how easily 

new sex -de termining loci can be integrated and, consequently, how readily sex chromosomes can be 

replaced.           

> Figure 2 .Illustration of multiple interacting variables that can affect sex -determining gene regulatory networks
> (GRNs) and sex -chromosome dynamics across vertebrate groups .Mammals and birds occupy the region with
> narrow embryonic development window, somatic cell initiation , strictly genetic master switches and strong
> regulatory lock -in, whereas many fishes, amphibians and non -avian reptiles lie toward the integrative, threshold -
> based region, where environmental inputs and alternative splicing act closer to the decision poin t and sex -
> chromosome turnover appears more frequent.

In this review, we synthesise developmental and regulatory evidence across vertebrates and 

propose a multidimensional framework (0) in which stable versus labile systems differ along several 

interacting axes: (i) the primary sex -determining signal (strictly genetic and cell -autonomous versus 

integrative signals combining genetic, epigenetic and environmental inputs); (ii) the cel l type and 

network position of the master sex -determining gene within the GRN (somatic cell with master genetic 

switches versus germ line cell number thresholds); (iii) the sensitive period for sex determination and 

its interaction with the thermal environment (narrow early window in a homeostatically buffered 

embryo versus a prolonged, temperatu re -sensitive period); (iv gene expression regulat ion such as 

dosage compensation (chromosome -wide mechanism versus absence or gene specific mode); (v) the 

influence of regulatory plasticity, such as environmentally responsive alternative splicing that acts 

within the SD cascade (little role versus acting at or near key node affecting sex determination) . We 7

suggest that mammals and birds occupy one end of this spectrum, whereas many fishes, amphibians 

and non -avian reptiles occupy the other . Our aim is to complement degeneration -based models of sex -

chromosome evolution with a developmental perspective: developmental GRN architecture is shaped 

by and constrains sex -chromosome evolution, creating feedback loops that can lead either to long -term 

evolutionary “lock -in” or to recurrent turnover. In the sections that follow, we develop this framework 

in detail s and discuss how integrating developmental biology, molecular mechanism , evolutionary 

genomics and population genetics can refine our understanding of sex -chromosome turnover across 

vertebrates. 

# 3. Master sex -determining genes acting on somatic cells and endothermy 

# ensure s developmental canalization of sex determination in mammals and 

# birds 

In therian mammals, sex determination is classically framed as the bifurcation of the bipotential 

gonad into testis or ovary, with most downstream sexual dimorphism caused by hormones produced by 

the gonads rather than from direct genetic effects in other tissues (Kashimada & Koopman, 2010; 

Mäkelä et al., 2019) . The Y -linked gene Sry acts as the master sex -determining gene in almost all 

examined therians, with only a handful of exception s (Gubbay et al., 1990; Kashimada & Koopman, 

2010; Koopman et al., 1991) . In mouse, Sry expression is both cell -type specific and sharply time -

limited during early embryonic development. Reporter and expression analyses show that Sry is 

confined to somatic pre -Sertoli cells of the genital ridge and is detectable only during a short interval 

from approximately embryonic day E10.5 to E12.5 (Albrecht & Eicher, 2001; Bullejos & Koopman, 

2001; Tanaka & Nishinakamura, 2014) . Within this narrow window, Sry directly activates Sox9 via 

testis -specific enhancers and triggers a positive -feedback loop in which Sox9 maintains its own 

expression and reinforces testis fate, while mutually antagonising pro -ovarian pathways such as 

Wnt4 /Rspo1 /β-catenin (Herpin & Schartl, 2015; Kashimada & Koopman, 2010; Sekido & Lovell -

Badge, 2008; Tanaka & Nishinakamura, 2014) . Single -cell transcriptomics analyses further refine the 

picture: during f oetal testis devel opment Sry is transiently activated specifically in pre -Sertoli cells and 

its onset directly precedes their differentiation into Sox9 + Sertoli cells. Sry expression sweeps along the 

genital ridge in a centre -to -pole wave, with individual supporting pre -Sertoli cells passing through a 

brief Sry⁺/Sox9 low state before switching to a stable Sox9 -dominated identity, consistent with Sry 

acting as a short -lived trigger that hands over control to a self -sustaining Sox9 networ k (Koopman, 

1999; Stévant et al., 2019; Stévant & Nef, 2019) . Disruption of Sry , or of key Sox9 regulatory elements, 

in XY embryos results in loss or failure of Sox9 up -regulation and a robust male -to -female gonadal sex 

reversal, with supporting cells adopting the female development pathway such as granulosa -like identity 

and ovaries forming instead of testes (Gonen et al., 2018; Koopman et al., 1991; Lavery et al., 2011) .

Furthermore, g erm -cell ablation experiments in mice and humans indicate that germ cells are not 

required for the initial specification of testis versus ovary: Sertoli cells, testis cords and ovarian 

structures can form and steroidogenesis can be initiated in their absen ce (Maatouk et al., 2012; Mäkelä 

et al., 2019) . Germ cells have a secondary role, contribut ing to optimal cord morphogenesis and 

endocrine function of the foetal testis , after the sex determination pathway has been initiated (Liu et al., 

2010; Mäkelä et al., 2019) . Thus, in mammals, the primary fate decision is clearly made by somatic 

cells and driven by Sry activating Sox9 , with germ cells acting later as modulators rather than initiators 

of gonadal sex determination .

In birds, dosage of the Z -linked transcription factor Dmrt1 plays an analogous role to Sry in 

mammals and also act s upstream. The exact mechanism is different as in birds the males are the 

homogametic sex (ZZ males) , and Dmrt1 is expressed in both sexes. Across major avian clades ZZ 8

embryos have roughly twice the Dmrt1 expression of ZW embryos in the bipotential gonad before 

gonadal sexual differentiation, which is consistently associated with testis development (Graves, 2014; 

Hirst et al., 2017) . Knockdown or knockout of Dmrt1 in chicken demonstrate that ZZ embryos induce 

gonadal feminisation, with ovarian -like morphology, up -regulation of ovarian markers such as Foxl 2

and Aromatase , and down -regulation of testis markers including Sox 9 (Ioannidis et al., 2021; Lee et al., 

2021; Smith et al., 2009) . Nevertheless, these feminised ZZ gonads do not become fully functional 

ovaries, and adult Dmrt 1-disrupted ZZ birds retain male secondary sexual traits (Lee et al., 2021) .

Overall, current evidence supports Dmrt 1 dosage as the primary genetic switch for testis development 

in birds, acting largely cell -autonomously in gonadal somatic cells. 

Mammals and birds share several developmental GRN featur es relevant to sex -chromosome 

stability. First, their primary signals are strictly genetic and chromosomally encoded without any 

environmental input at the time of cell fate specification . In both clades, the initial bias toward testis 

development depends on a discrete chromosomal cue , Sry expression (Y -linked) on XY individuals , or 

high (Z-linked ) Dmrt 1 dosage on ZZ individuals (Barske & Capel, 2008; Kashimada & Koopman, 

2010; Manolakou et al., 2006) . Environmental and endocrine factors can certainly disrupt sexual 

development, but available data suggest that they normally act downstream of the primary switch , both 

in the sex determination developmental GRN and in later development (Barske & Capel, 2008; 

Manolakou et al., 2006) . Second, after a short time window, altering Sry or Dmrt1 expression no longer 

affects cell fate, because downstream positive and negative feedback loops within the GRN lock the 

gonad into a testis or ovary trajectory (Kashimada & Koopman, 2010; Mäkelä et al., 2019; Sekido & 

Lovell -Badge, 2008, 2009) . Third, Sox9 activation by Sry in mammals and Dmrt 1 dosage in birds occurs 

within strongly canalised developmental GRN , that is, networks buffered against stochastic noise and 

perturbations so that, once induced, they reliably drive the gonad along a testis trajectory . These 

networks coordinate differentiation of multiple somatic lineages (Sertoli, Leydig, granulosa and the 

gonadal vasculature) and link gonadal fate to various endocrine pathways (Herpin & Schartl, 2015; 

Kashimada & Koopman, 2010; Mäkelä et al., 2019) . This developmental entrenchment makes it 

difficult for alternative loci on other chromosomes to take over as primary sex -determining switches 

without causing widespread pleiotropic damage. For example, disruption at this level is typically 

associated with disorders of sex ual development and infertility in both humans and mouse models, and 

karyotypic deviations from XX ♀/XY ♂ or ZW ♀/ZZ ♂ usually generate severe developmental 

abnormalities (Croft et al., 2018; Mäkelä et al., 2019; Warr & Greenfield, 2012) .

The canalisation of sex determination developmental GRN is probably further reinforced by 

endothermy . Mammals and birds generally maintain embryos within a tightly regulated thermal range, 

insulating the sex -determining cascade from ambient temperature fluctuations (Barske & Capel, 2008; 

Luckenbach et al., 2026) . Comparative and macroevolutionary studies have repeatedly noted an 

association between endothermy, predominance of genotypic sex determination, and the presence of 

highly differentiated, evolutionarily stable sex chromosomes in mammals and birds, in cont rast to the 

more labile systems typical of many ectothermic vertebrates (Barske & Capel, 2008; Kratochvíl et al., 

2021; Miller et al., 2004; M. T. Rovatsos et al., 2017) . From a macroevolutionary perspective, therian 

XY and avian ZW systems largely are among the oldest and most conserved sex -chromosome systems 

known. Comparative genomic analyses suggest that the ancestral therian XY pair originated around 

160 –180 million years ago, whereas the ancestral avian ZW system is at least 60 –100 million year s old 

(Graves, 2006; Hughes & Page, 2015; Ohno, 2010; Xu et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2014) . Across both 

clades, the X and Z chromosomes retain many ancestral genes, while the sex determination 

developmental GRN has persisted for tens of millions of years with only rare examples of neo -sex 9

chromosomes or other sex chromosome systems despite extensive lineage -specific degeneration at 

various degrees (Graves, 2014; Kratochvíl et al., 2021; Ohno, 2010; Sigeman et al., 2019) .

In summary, the combination of (i) an early -acting , transient, strictly genetic master signal 

expressed in somatic supporting cells, (ii) strong positive and negative feedback loops on gene 

expression canalising testis (Sertoli) vs over (granulosa) developmental trajectories , (iii) thermal 

buffering of embryonic development through endothermy, and possible long -term coevolution of these 

developmental networks with highly differentiated X/Y or Z/W chromosomes, together creates a 

developmental GRN lock -in tha t strongly resists invasion by alternative sex -determining loci . Together 

these effects make successful invasion and thus sex -chromosome turnover extremely unlikely (D. 

Charlesworth, 2021a; Herpin & Schartl, 2015; Hughes & Page, 2015; Kratochvíl et al., 2021) . This 

provides a clear contrast with the more flexible, environmentally integrated sex -determining GRNs of 

many ectothermic vertebrates, which we consider in the next section. 

# 4. Flexible, integrative sex -determining GRNs in amphibians, teleost fishes 

# and non -avian reptiles 

Many amphibians, teleost fishes and non -avian reptiles exhibit more flexible sex determination 

developmental GRNs than mammals and birds , in which genetic, environmental and germ -cell -derived 

signals are integrated over a broad developmental window to determine sex . These clades harbour much 

of the known diversity in sex -determining mechanisms and sex chromosome systems, including 

environmentally -dependent sex determination (ESD), which may interact with genetic (G SD ),

transition s between the two , and rapid sex -chromosome turnover (Kobayashi et al., 2013; Nagahama et 

al., 2021; Pan et al., 2016; Uno & Matsubara, 2024) .

Across amphibians, GSD appears to be common, but the identity of the sex chromosomes and 

the master sex -determining gene s var y among lineages. Linkage mapping and comparative analyses 

show that amphibian sex chromosomes derive from multiple, non -homologous linkage groups , even 

within single families, rather than from one conserved ancestral pair (Dufresnes et al., 2015; Jeffries et 

al., 2018; Sumida & Nishioka, 2000; Uno & Matsubara, 2024) . Only one molecular function of master 

sex -determining gene has been genetically characterised in Xenopus laevis . It is a W -linked Dmrt1 

paralogue, Dm-w, and is a dominant female -determining gene that antagonises Dmrt1 and directs 

ovarian development (Yoshimoto et al., 2008, 2010) . However , environmental and endocrine cues may 

still play important roles in sex determination (Ggert, 2004; Nakamura, 2009; Wallace et al., 1999) .

Classical work and more recent experiments show that larval exposure to exogenous estrogens or 

androgens, or to altered temperatures, can bias sex ratios or cause complete sex reversal in several 

anurans, including X. laevis and the common European frog, Rana temporaria (Flament, 2016; Matsuba 

et al., 2008; Ruiz -Garciá et al., 2021) . A recent review concludes that no amphibian species is currently 

known with pure ESD , but many show significant thermal sensitivity superimposed on GSD (Akashi et 

al., 2024; Ruiz -Garciá et al., 2021) . Taken together, these data suggest that amphibian gonads are 

specified by GRNs modulated both by genes and by external factors .

Teleosts exemplify highly labile, integrative sex -determining networks . Studies have identified 

a wide range of master sex -determining gene s including Dmrt1/ Dmy , Amh/ Amhy , Amhr2 , Gsdf , Sox3 ,

Gdf6 and others , often residing on different chromosomes in closely related species (Herpin & Schartl, 

2015; Heule et al., 2014; Kobayashi et al., 2013; Luckenbach et al., 2026; Matsuda et al., 2002; 

Nagahama et al., 2021; Pan et al., 2016; Volff et al., 2007) . This diversity underscores that the top of 

the sex determination GRN is easily rewired in teleosts. A distinctive feature of many teleost systems 

is that germ -cell number and state are themselves decisive inputs into gonadal fate. For example, in 

zebrafish, genetic or experimental depletion of primordial germ cells leads to phenotypic males 10 

containing testis -like gonads, whereas individuals retaining sufficient primordial germ cells can develop 

as females , and partial primordial germ cell depletion biases sex ratios towards males (Dai et al., 2015; 

Tzung et al., 2015) . In medaka, germ -cell -depleted XX embryos develop into males, whereas increasing 

germ -cell numbers can feminize XY individuals (Kurokawa et al., 2007) . These findings support a 

model in which germ -cell number and proliferation , induced by genes such as Dmrt1/ Dmy , Amh/ Amhy ,

Amhr2 , Gsdf , Sox3 , Gdf6 , determine whether the primordial, bipotential gonad crosses a male or female -

promoting threshold, and the decision period is wider than in mammals and birds , whose decision is 

short and initiated by somatic cells. 

Environmental factors frequently feed into the sex determination GRN . Reviews of teleost sex 

determination consistently emphasize that genetic, endocrine, social and thermal cues converge on a 

network of gonadal regulators, with species -specific combinations of master sex -determining genes at 

the top (Augstenová & Ma, 2025; Baroiller et al., 2009; Kobayashi et al., 2013; Nagahama et al., 2021) .

In several teleosts, temperature manipulation during early gonadal development can induce sex reversal 

and alter the expression and epigenetic state of key sex determination GRN genes. For example, in Nile 

tilapia, high -temperature exposure masculinizes genetic females and is associated with increased DNA 

methylation and reduced expression of the ovarian aromatase gene Cyp19a1a (Li et al., 2014; Wang et 

al., 2017) . In European sea bass and related species, both the genetic background and rearing 

temperature influence methylation or expression of Cyp19a1a and Dmrt1 and adult sex ratios (Navarro -

Martín et al., 2011; Piferrer & Blázquez, 2005) .

Non -avian reptiles display the full continuum f rom purely GSD to ESD and multiple 

evolutionary transitions between them (Ezaz et al., 2010; Holleley et al., 2015; Valenzuela & Lance, 

2004) . In classical temperature -dependent sex determination (TSD) species such as the red -eared slider 

turtle ( Trachemys scripta elegans ), many freshwater turtles and crocodilians, incubation temperature 

during a prolonged thermosensitive period decisively biases gonadal fate (Akashi et al., 2024; 

Valenzuela & Lance, 2004) . In T. scripta , t he molecular basis of TSD ha s begun to be elucidated : the 

histone demethylase Kdm6b shows temperature -dependent, sexually dimorphic expression in early 

embryos, and loss -of -function experiments demonstrate that it is required for testis development at 

male -producing temperatures (Ge et al., 2018) . Consistent with a prolonged thermosensitive window, 

transcriptomic work in turtles reveals that sex -biased gene expression and epigenetic modifications 

accumulate gradually across this interval (Akashi et al., 2024; Ge et al., 2018; Whiteley et al., 2021) .

Mixed GSD -TSD systems further highlight how temperature can override chromosomal sex 

determination. In the Australian central bearded dragon Pogona vitticeps (ZZ/ZW ), high incubation 

temperature s cause male -to -female sex reversal of ZZ embryos, and the resulting sex -reversed ZZ 

females are fertile and produce all -ZZ offspring , providing a clear route by which W chromosomes 

could be lost or replace d over evolutionary time (Holleley et al., 2015) . Transcriptomic analyses using 

sex revers ed individuals show extensive rewiring of gonadal GRNs, including changes in Dmrt1 , Foxl2 ,

Cryp19a1a and other core pathway genes, as well as coordinated changes in somatic and germ -cell 

chromatin state and marked differences in meiotic timing between developing testes and ovaries 

(Whiteley et al., 2021) . More broadly, data from amphibians and reptiles indicate that temperature and 

endocrine cues can re -specify gonadal fate during larval or embryonic development, often via effects 

on epigenetic regulators and splicing factors within the gonadal GRN (Ge et al., 2018; Ruiz -Garciá et 

al., 2021; Sun et al., 2025) .

Taken together, these observations support an emerging picture of sex -determining GRNs that 

are more permissive to change than those of mammals and birds . The reason is that the sex 

determination decision is produced by the interaction of multiple genetic and environmental inputs, 

including the internal environment such as germ cell number or the endocrinal environment which take 11 

place over an extended and environmentally exposed decisive period . Consequently, there are multiple 

points at which new sex -determining alleles, environmental modifiers or chromosomal rearrangements 

can be accommodated without catastrophic disruption of development. This GRN architecture is 

consistent wit h, and may contribute to , the high lability of sex determination and frequent sex -

chromosome turnover documented in many amphibian, teleost and non -avian reptile lineages, even 

though direct causal links b etween specific GRN features and particular sex -chromosome transitions 

remain to be demonstrated. 

# 5. Dosage compensation as a developmental constraint 

Classical models of sex -chromosome evolution predict that suppression of recombination 

around the sex -determining locus promotes gene loss on the Y or W and generates dosage imbalances 

that are often offset by evolution of dosage compensation in the heterogametic sex (Charlesworth, 1998; 

Charlesworth & Crow, 1978; Graves, 2015; Mank, 2013) . The strength, mechanism and developmental 

timing of dosage compensation differ widely among lineages and are now routinely summarized using 

sex -chromosome: autosome expression ratios and analyses of sex -biased expression (Duan & Larschan, 

2019; Mank, 2013; Naurin et al., 2010) . From a developmental gene regulatory network (GRN) 

perspective, once dosage compensation is established it does more than correct dosage imbalance: it 

creates a distinct regulatory environment for sex chromosomes which takes place earlier than sex 

determination in mammals and birds , which may interact with the timing and cell -type specificity of 

master sex -determining genes to constrain subsequent changes in sex -determining architecture , and 

possibly reinforce the further differentiation between sex chromosomes (Lenormand & Roze, 2022) .

In therian mammals, dosage compensation is achieved primarily through X -chromosome 

inactivation (XCI) in XX individuals, coupled to at least partial up -regulation of the active X (Duan & 

Larschan, 2019; Faucillion & Larsson, 2015; Lin et al., 2012; Ohno, 1966) . Developmental studies in 

mouse show that XCI imprinting is initiated in extra -embryonic tissues at the pre -implantation stage, 

followed by reactivation of the paternal X in the epiblast and onset of random XCI during early 

development ( ~E4.5 –E6.5 ), well before gonad formation (Kamikawa & Donohoe, 2014; Malcore & 

Kalantry, 2024; Oikawa et al., 2014) . By the time the genital ridges emerge (~E10) and the master sex -

determining gene ( Sry ) is transiently expressed in pre -Sertoli cells (~E10.5 –E12.5), a stable pattern of 

single random active X chromosome is already in place in somatic cell lineages (Oikawa et al., 2014; 

Panda et al., 2020) . Meiotic sex chromosome inactivation in mammals involves transcriptional silencing 

of the X and Y chromosomes during the meiotic phase of spermatogenesis (Okamoto et al., 2011; 

Turner, 2007) . In addition to XCI, meiotic sex chromosome inactivation is also a complex 

developmental rewiring of gene expression silencing in X-linked genes in the male germ line during 

meiosis . Thus, the Sry→Sox9 switch operates in cells whose X-dosage state and chromatin 

configuration have already been fixed by XCI and later constrained by meiotic sex chromosome 

inactivation . The X chromosome behaves as a dosage -regulated and epigenetically distinctive 

compartment of the genome, while the Y has undergone extensive d egeneration and retains a small set 

of male -beneficial genes tightly integrated with testis function (Hughes & Page, 2015) . In this context, 

relocating the master sex -determining gene from the Y to an autosome , whether by Sry translocation or 

by recruit ing a novel autosomal gene, would require the new locus to function correctly within a very 

narrow sex -determining window and within an already established r egulatory and dosage -compensation 

regime. Immediate genotypes, such as XX individuals carrying an autosomal Sry , would still follow the 

XCI program and dosage compensation , creating mismatches between gonadal sex and X -linked gene 

dosage that are likely to be strongly deleterious . The combination of (i) a pre -established, chromosome -

wide dosage -compensation programme and (ii) a tightly timed, somatic Sry triggering therefore creates 

a form of developmental GRN lock -in : the sex -determining cascade is anchored to the X/Y pair, and 12 

alternative top -level configurations are likely to generate pervasive dosage and expression mismatches 

(Charlesworth, 2021b; Hughes & Page, 2015) .

In birds, dosage compensation of the Z chromosome is incomplete and heterogeneous . Analyses 

consistently show that many Z -linked genes remain male -biased (ZZ > ZW) and that female Z 

expression is not fully equalised to the male Z, arguing against a mammal -like chromosome -wide 

inactivation mechanism (Fallahshahroudi et al., 2025; Mank, 2009; Sigeman et al., 2018; Uebbing et 

al., 2015) . Instead, studies support a model of gene -by -gene and tissue -specific dosage adjustment: 

some Z -linked loci show equal expression between sexes in particular tissues or stages, whereas many 

others remain male -biased, and epigenetic marks on the female Z are consistent with local modulation 

rather than global silencing (McQueen & Clinton, 2009; Naurin et al., 2010; Sigeman et al., 2018) . For 

sex determination, the key observation is that Dmrt1 appears to escape full compensation in the 

embryonic gonad . During the bipotential stage, Dmrt1 expression is roughly double in ZZ gonads 

compared to ZW gonads, and experimental reduction of Dmrt1 dosage in ZZ embryos via RNAi or 

CRISPR/Cas9 knock -out causes gonadal feminization with ovarian -like morphology, up -regulation of 

ovarian markers and down -regulation of Sox9 and other testis genes (Ioannidis et al., 2021; Lambeth et 

al., 2014; Smith et al., 2009) . In other tissues, however, Dmrt1 and many Z -linked genes have more 

equal expression between the sexes (Estermann et al., 2021; Uebbing et al., 2013) . From a GRN 

standpoint, this means that the avian master sex -determining gene operates in a chromosomal context 

that is partially dosage -regulated depending on the gene s in question. T here is enough dosage 

compensation to mitigate deleterious Z -linked dosage effects globally, but the Dmrt1 dosage difference 

is preserved specifically in the cell types and time window relevant to sex determination (Ioannidis et 

al., 2021; Lambeth et al., 2014; Smith et al., 2009) . Th e Z-linked regulatory environment is distinct 

from autosomes but less rigid than the XCI landscape in mammals. In addition, meio tic sex chromosome 

inactivation also evolves the developmental rewiring of gene expression silencing in Z -linked genes in 

female germline cells during meiosis (Schoenmakers et al., 2009) , which contribute to developmental 

GRN lock -in. 

Outside mammals and birds, dosage -compensation regimes are more variable across 

species /lineages and typically more local , or gene -specific . In amphibians, no dosage compensation 

comparable to XCI has been demonstrated. Comparative expression studies in frogs indicate that males 

and females can differ in the copy number of sex -linked genes without corresponding global 

equalization of expression, implying that these lineages often tolerate dosage differences and do not 

need to balanc e them using chromosome -scale mechanisms (Malcom et al., 2014) . Many teleost fish 

show a similar pattern. Across most surveyed species, S:A expression ratios are close to 1 in both sexes, 

suggesting either an absence of chromosome -wide compensation or compensation restricted to a subset 

of dosage -sensitive genes (Duan & Larschan, 2019; Mank, 2013) . A notable exception is the Poecilia 

picta/P. parae lineage, where a highly diverged X chromosome is accompanied by nearly complete 

dosage compensation of X -linked genes in both sexes (Darolti et al., 2019; Fong et al., 2023) . However, 

such cases remain rare among teleosts; in many systems, sex chromosomes retain an “autosome -like” 

expression profile for much of their gene content, even when some degree of degeneration has occurred .

Non -avian reptiles occupy an intermediate position. Work on lizards and turtles has revealed incomplete 

or regional Z dosage compensation in several ZW and XY systems: some Z -linked genes are dosage -

balanced between sexes, whereas many remain male -biased (Webster et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2022) . In 

the Gila monster (ZZ/ZW ), for example, global Z expression is higher in males than females, but there 

is evidence for local gene -by -gene compensation of a subset of Z -linked genes (Webster et al., 2023) .

An e xception showing chromosom e level dosage compensation in the green anole ( Anolis carolinensis )

which has a differentiated XY system (Tenorio et al., 2024) . Together, amphibians, most teleosts and 13 

many non -avian reptiles have sex chromosome s without chromosome -wide dosage compensation but 

sometimes have dosage compensation for dosage sensitive genes . In the context of sex determination 

developmental GRN lock -in hypothesis , the chromosome -wide dosage compensation tuned to the 

ancestral XX/XY or ZZ/ZW system of mammals and birds makes sex chromosome turnover difficult. 

A novel S D locus would allow the generation of X X males, XY females (or ZZ females, ZW males) 

with inappropriate X or Z dosage , resulting in deleterious genotypes that would block sex chromosome 

turnover. 

Therian mammals are “locked -in” in multiple aspects of their sex determination GRN : XCI is 

in place before the gonad forms, the Sry→Sox9 switch is temporally narrow and restricted to pre -Sertoli 

cells, and the sex chromosomes are fully dosage compensated . Birds appear to represent a partial lock -

in case: ZW are ancient and Dmrt 1 dosage is deeply integrated into gonadal GRNs, but Z dosage 

compensation is incomplete and gene -specific, potentially allowing more scope for rearrangements (e.g. 

neo -sex chromo som e formation) than in mammals. In contrast, many ectothermic vertebrates with labile 

sex determination and frequent sex -chromosome turnover lack chromosome -wide dosage compensation 

and often retain sex chromosomes with indistinguishable chromatin and gene expression to autosomes; 

in such systems, new master sex -determining genes may be able to evolve , move between chromosomes 

and establish in a population with fewer conflicts with pre -existing genome -wide regulatory 

programmes. 

We emphasise that current data do not support a simple one -to -one causal link between dosage 

compensation and sex -chromosome stability: there are lineages with old, stable sex chromosomes but 

only local dosage compensation , and lineages with strong dosage compensation with sex chromosome 

fusions, rearrangements or turnover (Furman et al., 2020; Mank, 2009, 2013; McQueen & Clinton, 

2009; Sigeman et al., 2018) , as well as rare cases of sex chromosome turnover in mammals (Teraoa et 

al., 2017) . The value of the developmental GRN lock -in perspective is that it integrates dosage 

compensation with other features discussed in this review into a coherent regulatory biochemical 

picture .

# 6. Alternative splicing and gene regulatory plasticity in vertebrate sex 

# determination 

Alternative splicing adds a post -transcriptional layer of flexibility to sex -determining gene 

regulatory networks (GRNs). In vertebrates, many core regulators of gonadal development , including 

Wt1, S ox 9, F oxl 2, A mh , F gfr 2 and Dmrt 1, produce multiple isoforms with distinct DNA -binding 

properties, transactivation potential or interaction partners (Gómez -Redondo et al., 2021; Hammes et 

al., 2001) . Genome -wide transcriptomic analyses of mouse foetal gonads (across E10.5 –E13.5 ) identify 

hundreds of sex - and stage -specific splicing events, enriched in genes involved in transcription, 

chromatin regulation and RNA processing (Gómez -Redondo et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2018) . These data 

indicate that alternative splicing is an intrinsic feature of sex -determining GRNs. 

In therian mammals, alternative spicing matters for gonadal development, but current evidence 

places it non -essential node in affecting the transcriptionally defined master switch for sex 

determination . A specific Fgfr 2c isoform mediates Fgf 9 signalling in Sertoli cell precursors and 

represses the Foxl 2/W nt 4-driven ovarian pathways; disruption of Fgfr2c leads to partial or complete 

gonadal sex reversal in XY mice (Bagheri -Fam et al., 2017; Bird et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2007) . Foxl 2

itself shows isoform diversity and is crucial for ovarian differentiation and maintenance , and its 

dysfunction causes ovarian failure and adult ovar y-to -testis differentiation (Georges et al., 2013, 2014) .

Mis -splicing of several of these genes is implicated in disorders of sex development (Gómez -Redondo 

et al., 2021) . Genome -scale RNA -seq confirms extensive alternative splicing in foetal mouse gonads 14 

exactly during the period when the bipotential gonad commits to a testis or ovary fate (Zhao et al., 

2018) . Nevertheless, the decisive male -determining event remains the tightly timed transcriptional 

activation of Sry and subsequent up -regulation of Sox9 in somatic supporting cells, followed by strong 

positive feedback and mutual antagonism with ovarian genes. To date, there is no convincing evidence 

that splicing of Sry itself, or of Dmrt1 in birds, is environment -sensitive or that it constitutes the primary 

male –female switch (Gómez -Redondo et al., 2021) . In birds, Dmrt 1 also produces multiple transcripts, 

but experimental work strongly supports Dmrt 1 dosage , rather than alternative isoforms , as the key 

determinant of testis development. Knockdown of Dmrt 1 in ZZ chicken embryos feminises the gonads 

(Smith et al., 2009) , and combined genomic and functional analyses show that Dmrt 1 dosage is essential 

for primary sex determination (Estermann et al., 2021; Ioannidis et al., 2021) . Together with early X -

inactivation in mammals and locus -specific Z dosage adjustment in birds, these findings suggest that in 

endotherms alternative splicing operates largely within a pre -existing, dosage -compensated, somatic 

master -switch architecture. Changes in splicing at key nodes can strongly disrupt gonad development, 

but there is little evidence that they have directly contributed to sex -determining switches. This pattern 

is consistent with the long -term stability of XY and ZW systems and the rarity of master -switch 

replacement in these clades. 

In ectothermic vertebrates with labile sex determination, alternative splicing often lies closer to 

the decision node for sex -determining switches and can be directly modulated by environmental cues. 

Temperature -dependent sex determination reptiles provide the clearest mechanistic examples. In the 

red -eared slider turtle Trachemys scripta , incubation temperature alters splicing of chromatin regulators 

such as Kdm6b and Jarid2 ; pS tat 3–Kdm6b signalling has previously been shown to couple temperature 

to Dmrt1 activation in this system (Ge et al., 2018; Weber et al., 2020) . Most recently, the RNA -binding 

protein RBM20 was shown to mediate TSD in this species , by modulating the relative abundance of 

two alternative isoforms of Wt1 (+KTS and −KTS); perturbing RBM20 or Wt1 splicing is sufficient to 

shift gonadal fate, establishing a direct causal link between temperature, splicing regulation and 

vertebrate sex determination (Sun et al., 2025) . In the dragon lizard Pogona vitticeps , which shows sex 

reversal of ZZ males at high temperature . At the molecular level, high temperatures alter alternative 

splicing of chromatin regulators: intron -retained and truncated isoforms of Jarid2 , Kdm6b and Jmjd3 

accumulate specifically in sex -reversed females, implicating splice -form shifts in the TSD override of 

GSD (Deveson et al., 2017; Whiteley et al., 2022) . These data again place temperature -sensitive 

alternative splicing of chromatin regulators at the interface between environment and the sex -

determining GRN. In teleost fishes, multiple isoforms of Dmrt 1 and Cyp19a1a have been described, 

and isoform usage shifts during sex change or thermal sex reversal. In the protandrous hermaphrodite 

barramundi (Lates calcarifer ), sex -specific methylation and alternative splicing of Dmrt1 and 

Cyp19a1a are associated with male -to -female sex change: males lack full -length Cyp19a1a transcripts, 

whereas females lack the Dmrt1 exon encoding the DM domain (Domingos et al., 2018) . High -

temperature feminisation in barramundi is likewise accompanied by changes in DNA methylation and 

alternative splicing of these genes (Budd et al., 2026) . Comparative analyses across fishes highlight a 

broad diversity of Dmrt 1 transactivation regions and isoforms with sex and stage -specific expression, 

suggesting rich potential for regulatory divergence at this node (Augstenová & Ma, 2025; Dong et al., 

2020; Ishikawa et al., 2024) . For amphibians, evidence is more fragmentary, but studies on Dmrt1 has 

not shown any alternative splicing events (Augstenová & Ma, 2025) . Overall, ectothermic vertebrates 

thus provide several clear cases where environment -responsive alternative splicing at or near top 

regulatory nodes is causally implicated in directing gonadal fate, rather than merely fine -tuning an 

already fixed decision. 15 

Taken together, the comparative data suggest that some vertebrate lineages use alternative 

splicing and others do not , alternative splicing is pervasive , but that the placement of alternative splicing 

within the sex -determining GRN differs in ways that align with the broader developmental framework 

proposed in this review. In mammals and birds, alternative splicing primarily tunes downstream 

regulators in a GRN that is already constrained by an early, transcriptionally defined somatic master 

switch ( Sry→Sox 9 or Dmrt1 dosage), by a pre -established dosage -compensation landscape and by tight 

temporal canalisation of the decision window (Gómez -Redondo et al., 2021; Ioannidis et al., 2021; Zhao 

et al., 2018) . In many ectothermic vertebrates with labile sex determination, alternative splicing sits 

closer to environmentally sensitive nodes (e.g. Rmb 20 –Wt1, Dmrt1 , Cyp19a1a ) and can be directly 

modulated by temperature or social environment during a prolonged sensitive period (Domingos et al., 

2018; Sun et al., 2025; Whiteley et al., 2022) . Within this context, we propose that alternative splicing 

contributes to the developmental GRN lock -in framework. In lineages where sex fate is determined 

partly by alternative splicing decisions at or near key regulatory nodes , especially where those splicing 

events integrate environmental signals , the sex -determining GRN has a larger mutational and regulatory 

target for evolutionary change, potentially facilitating rewiring of sex determination and sex -

chromosome turnover. In lineages where alternative splicing acts mainly downstream of an early, 

transcriptionally defined, dosage -compensated master switch, the GRN is developmentally more 

constrained, and repeated replacement of the master regulator is less probable . This hypothesis is 

consistent with , but does not yet explain , observed contrasts in sex -chromosome dynamics. It points to 

future work using isoform -resolved comparative transcriptomics and targeted functional experiments 

in both “locked -in” (e.g. mouse, chicken) and “flexible -threshold” (e.g. temperature sex determination 

reptiles, sex -changing teleosts) systems. 

# 7. Conclusions and future directions 

Sex chromosomes turnover rapidly in some vertebrate lineages yet remain essentially 

unchanged for >100 Myr in others. Classical models centred on evolutionary trap hypothesis , sexually 

antagonistic selection , mutation load, genetic drift, selfish genetic element accumulation (including 

meiotic drive) , go a long way toward explaining the degenerated sex chromosomes in mammals and 

birds but are not good explanations for the repeated replacement of sex chromosomes in many fishes, 

amphibians and non -avian repti les .

Here we argue that this contrast is also shaped by how sex determination is implemented 

developmentally. In therian mammals and birds, sex is specified by an early, transient, strictly genetic 

signal ( Sry→Sox9 or Dmrt1 dosage) acting in somatic cells within a thermally buffered embryo, 

embedded in a canalised GRN and tightly coupled to strong regulatory programmes such as dosage 

compensation. In many ectothermic vertebrates, by contrast, sex -determining GRNs are flexible and 

integrative: genetic factors, ge rm cells, epigenetic regulators, temperature and other environmental cues 

are combined over a prolonged, environmentally exposed sensitive period, with alternative splicing and 

local dosage adjustment operating at or near key regulatory nodes. We propose the developmental GRN 

lock -in hypothesis (Figure 2) . In endotherms, the combination of an entrenched somatic master switch, 

early established chromosome -scale or strong regulation and highly differentiated sex chromosomes 

creates a high barrier for invasion by new sex -determining loci, making sex -chromosome turnover 

unlikely. In many ectothermic lineages, there are more “entry points” for new master genes due to 

distributed decision points for sex determination , including environmental, which act over a longer time 

period , weaker dosage compensation and alternative splicing so that novel SD genes can be 

accommodated without catastrophic developmental failure, contributing to higher se x chromosome 

turnover rates. 16 

The developmental GRN lock -in hypothesis predicts that sex -chromosome stability should 

covary with features such as the timing and cell type of the master regulator , the developmental timing 

and genomic scope of dosage compensation, the role of germ cells in primary fate decisions and the 

position of environmentally responsive splicing within the GRN. Testing these ideas will require 

isoform -resolved, cell -type –resol ved transcriptomics across the sex -determining window, comparative 

developmental data from a broad range of taxa, and functional experiments targeting GRN nodes that 

are plausible candidates for evolutionary transitions. By explicitly integrating developmental gene 

regulatory networks with population genetics and comparative genomics, we aim to move the field 

beyond population genetics or evolutionary genomics explanations of sex -chromosome evolution. The 

challenge now is to connect these layers , including development, molecular, environment and genome 

architecture into quantitative, testable mode ls that can explain not only how sex chromosomes change, 

but when and why some systems remain remarkably stable while others are in constant flux. 

Author Contributions 

W. -J. M . & Q. Z . designed the study. R. F . and T. C . collected data for sex chromosome turnover and 

alternative splicing respectively. W. -J. M . and P. V. synthesized ideas from the literature. P. V ., R. F .

and W. -J. M designed the figure visualization. W. -J. M . drafted the manuscript with significant input 

from P. V . and Q. Z. All authors have read and agreed to the submitted version of the manuscript. 

Data Availability Statement 

NA. 

Acknowledgments 

We gratefully acknowledge the Editor -in -Chief of GBE for inviting us to contribute th is review , which 

grew out of a symposium we organized in SMBE 2025 . This work is funded by the ERC starting grant 

(FrogWY, 101039501) and a starting grant from Vrije Universiteit Brussel (OZR4049) to Wen -Juan 

Ma. Views and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect 

those of the European Union or the European Research Council Executive Agency. Neither the 

European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them. 

Conflicts of Interest 

The authors declare no conflict of interest. 

# Reference s

1. Akashi H, Uno Y, Miura I. 2024. Understanding the role of environmental temperature on sex 

determination through comparative studies in reptiles and amphibians. J Exp Zool A Ecol Integr 

Physiol 341:48 –59. 

2. Albrecht KH, Eicher EM. 2001. Evidence that Sry is expressed in pre -Sertoli cells and Sertoli 

and granulosa cells have a common precursor. Dev Biol 240:92 –107. 

3. Angelopoulou R, Lavranos G, Manolakou P. 2012. Sex determination strategies in 2012: 

towards a common regulatory model. Reprod Biol Endocrinol 10:13. 17 

4. Augstenová B, W-J. Ma . 2025. Decoding Dmrt1: insights into vertebrate sex determination and 

gonadal differentiation. J Evol Biol 38:811 –828. 

5. Bagheri -Fam S, Bird AD, Zhao L, Ryan JM, Yong M, Harley VR, Koopman P. 2017. Testis 

determination requires a specific FGFR2 isoform to repress FOXL2. Endocrinology 158:3832 –

3843. 

6. Baroiller J -F, D’Cotta H, Saillant E. 2009. Environmental effects on fish sex determination and 

differentiation. Sex Dev 3:118 –135. 

7. Barske LA, Capel B. 2008. Blurring the edges in vertebrate sex determination. Curr Opin Genet 

Dev 18:499 –505. 

8. Bird AD, Sungaila T, Combes AN, Wilhelm D, Koopman P. 2023. Somatic FGFR2 is required 

for germ cell maintenance in the fetal mouse testis. Biol Reprod 108:116 –129. 

9. Budd AM, Domingos JA, Jerry DR. 2025. Mechanisms driving temperature -induced early sex 

change in barramundi. Aquaculture 586:740725. 

10. Bullejos A, Koopman P. 2001. Spatially dynamic expression of Sry in mouse genital ridges. Dev 

Dyn 221:201 –205. 

11. Bunce C, Sinclair AH, Sekido R. 2023. Dynamic regulation of Sry and Sox9 expression in the 

developing mouse testis. Dev 150:dev201234. 

12. Charlesworth D. 2021. The timing of genetic degeneration of sex chromosomes. Philos Trans R 

Soc Lond B 376:20200093. 

13. Chue J, Smith CA. 2011. Sex determination and sexual differentiation in the avian model. FEBS 

J 278:1027 –1034. 

14. Croft B et al. 2018. Human sex reversal is caused by duplication or deletion of SOX9 regulatory 

elements. Nat Commun 9:5319. 

15. Dai X, Jin X, Ye J, Wei W, Wang Z. 2015. Sufficient numbers of early germ cells are essential 

for female sex development in zebrafish. PLoS One 10:e0117824. 

16. Darolti I, Wright AE, Sandkam BA, Morris J, Bloch NI, Farré M, et al. 2019. Extreme 

heterogeneity in sex chromosome differentiation and dosage compensation in livebearers. Proc 

Natl Acad Sci USA 116:19031 –19036. 

17. Deveson I.W., Holleley C.E., Blackburn J., Marshall Graves J.A., Mattick J.S., Waters P.D., 

Georges A. 2017. Differential intron retention in Jumonji chromatin modifier genes is implicated 

in reptile temperature -dependent sex determination. Sci Adv 3:e1700 731. 

18. Domingos JA, Budd AM, Banh QQ, King H, Liew WC, Jerry DR. 2018. Sex -specific dmrt1 and 

cyp19a1 methylation and alternative splicing in gonads of the protandrous hermaphrodite 

barramundi. PLoS One 13:e0204182. 

19. Dong J, Huang J, Chan W -S, Guo C, Duan Y, Wu Q. 2020. Comparative genomics studies on 

the dmrt gene family in fish. Front Genet 11:563210. 

20. Duan J, Liu H. 2019. Dosage compensation: how to be compensated…or not? Curr Biol 

29:R130 –R132. 

21. Estermann MA, Major AT, Smith CA. 2021. Genetic regulation of avian testis development. 

Genes 12:1459. 

22. Faucillion M -L, Larsson J. 2015. Increased expression of X -linked genes in mammals is 

associated with a higher stability of mRNAs. Genome Biol Evol 7:1039 –1052. 

23. Flament S. 2016. Sex reversal in amphibians. Sex Dev 10:267 –278. 

24. Fong LJM, Darolti I, Metzger DCH, Morris J, Lin Y, Sandkam BA, Mank JE. 2023. 

Evolutionary history of the Poecilia picta sex chromosomes. Genome Biol Evol 15:evad030. 

25. Fridolfsson A -K, Cheng H, Copeland NG et al. 1998. Evolution of the avian sex chromosomes 

from an ancestral pair of autosomes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:8147 –8152. 18 

26. Furman BLS, Metzger DCH, Darolti I, Wright AE, Sandkam BA, Almeida P, Mank JE. 2020. 

Sex chromosome evolution: so many exceptions to the rules. Genome Biol Evol 12:750 –763. 

27. Ge C, Ye J, Weber C, Sun W, Zhang H, Zhou Y, Cai C, Qian G, Capel B. 2018. The histone 

demethylase KDM6B regulates temperature -dependent sex determination in a turtle species. 

Science 360:645 –648. 

28. Ge C., Ye J., Weber C., Sun W., Zhang H., Zhou Y., Cai C., Qian G., Capel B. 2017. Dmrt1 

induces the male pathway in a turtle species with temperature -dependent sex determination. 

Development 144:2222 –2233. 

29. Georges A, Auguste A, Bessière L, Vanet A, Todeschini A -L, Veitia RA. 2013. FOXL2: a 

central transcription factor of the ovary. J Mol Endocrinol 52:R17 –R33. 

30. Georges A, L’Hôte D, Todeschini A -L, Auguste A, Legois B, Zider A, Veitia RA. 2014. The 

transcription factor FOXL2 mobilizes estrogen signaling to maintain the identity of ovarian 

granulosa cells. eLife 3:e04207. 

31. Gómez -Redondo I, Planells B, Burgos M, Marchal JA, Sánchez L. 2021. Role of alternative 

splicing in sex determination in vertebrates. Sex Dev 15:381 –397. 

32. Gonen N et al. 2018. Sex reversal following deletion of a single distal enhancer of Sox9. Science 

360:1469 –1473. 

33. Graves JAM. 2014. Avian sex, sex chromosomes, and dosage compensation in the age of 

genomics. Cytogenet Genome Res 144:27 –46. 

34. Gubbay J et al. 1990. A gene mapping to the sex -determining region of the mouse Y 

chromosome is a member of a novel family of embryonically expressed genes. Nature 346:245 –

250. 

35. Hammes A, Guo J -K, Lutsch G, et al. 2001. Two splice variants of the Wilms’ tumor 1 gene 

have distinct functions during sex determination and nephron formation. Cell 106:319 –329. 

36. Hattori R.S., Murai Y., Oura M., Masuda S., Majhi S.K., Sakamoto T., Fernandino J.I., Somoza 

G.M., Yokota M., Strüssmann C.A. 2012. A Y -linked anti -Müllerian hormone duplication takes 

over a critical role in sex determination in the Patagonian pejerrey Odo ntesthes hatcheri. Proc 

Natl Acad Sci USA 109:2955 –2959. 

37. Herpin A, Schartl M. 2015. Plasticity of gene -regulatory networks controlling sex 

determination: of masters, slaves, usual suspects, newcomers, and usurpators. EMBO Rep 

16:1260 –1274. 

38. Heule C., Salzburger W., Böhne A. 2014. Genetics of sexual development: an evolutionary 

playground for fish. Genetics 196:579 –591. 

39. Hirst CE et al. 2017. Sex reversal and comparative data undermine the W chromosome’s role in 

avian sex determination. Endocrinology 158:2970 –2983. 

40. Holleley C.E., O’Meally D., Sarre S.D., Marshall Graves J.A., Ezaz T., Matsubara K., Azad B., 

Zhang X., Georges A. 2015. Sex reversal triggers the rapid transition from genetic to 

temperature -dependent sex determination in Pogona vitticeps. Nature 523:79 –82. 

41. Hughes JF, Page DC. 2015. The biology and evolution of mammalian Y chromosomes. Annu 

Rev Genet 49:507 –527. 

42. Imaimatsu K et al. 2022. Live imaging of Sry and Sox9 expression dynamics during mouse testis 

determination. Dev 149:dev200020. 

43. Ioannidis J et al. 2021. Primary sex determination in birds depends on DMRT1 dosage in the 

avian Z chromosome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 118:e2026124118. 

44. Ioannidis J, Taylor G, Zhao D, Liu L, Idoko -Akoh A, et al. 2021. Primary sex determination in 

birds depends on DMRT1 dosage, but gonadal sex does not determine adult secondary sex 

characteristics. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 118:e2020909118. 19 

45. Kamikawa Y, Ohta H, Kanda T. 2014. The dynamics of X -chromosome inactivation in mouse 

preimplantation embryos and extraembryonic tissues. Mol Reprod Dev 81:926 –936. 

46. Kashimada K, Koopman P. 2010. Sry: the master switch in mammalian sex determination. Dev 

137:3921 –3930. 

47. Kim Y, Bingham N, Sekido R, Parker KL, Lovell -Badge R, Capel B. 2007. Fibroblast growth 

factor receptor 2 regulates proliferation and Sertoli differentiation during male sex 

determination. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104:16558 –16563. 

48. Kobayashi Y., Nagahama Y., Nakamura M. 2013. Diversity and plasticity of sex determination 

and differentiation in fishes. Sex Dev 7:115 –125. 

49. Koopman P et al. 1991. Male development of chromosomally female mice transgenic for Sry. 

Nature 351:117 –121. 

50. Kratochvíl L, Gamble T, Rovatsos M, et al. 2021. Expanding the paradigm: diversity and 

dynamics of sex determination in vertebrates. Sex Dev 15:335 –348. 

51. Kratochvíl L, Gamble T, Rovatsos M. 2021. Sex chromosome evolution among amniotes: is the 

origin of sex chromosomes non -random? Philos Trans R Soc Lond B 376:20200108. 

52. Kurokawa H., Saito D., Nakamura S., Katoh -Fukui Y., Ohta K., Baba T., et al. 2007. Germ cells 

are essential for sexual dimorphism in the medaka gonad. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104:16958 –

16963. 

53. Lavery R et al. 2011. XY Sox9 loss -of -function mouse mutants show complete sex reversal and 

produce partially fertile XY oocytes. Dev 138:4219 –4231. 

54. Lee H -J et al. 2021. DMRT1 is essential for male sex determination in the chicken. Proc Natl 

Acad Sci USA 118:e2023647118. 

55. Li X, Li L, Pandey R, Byun JS, Gardner K. 2017. Dosage compensation in the process of X -

inactivation and reactivation. Sci Rep 7:10871. 

56. Liew W.C., Orbán L. 2014. Zebrafish sex: a complicated affair. Brief Funct Genomics 13:172 –

187. 

57. Lin F, Xing K, Zhang J, He X. 2012. Expression reduction in mammalian X chromosome 

evolution refutes Ohno’s hypothesis of dosage compensation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 

109:11752 –11757. 

58. Liu CF, Liu C, Yao HH -C. 2018. Building pathways for gonadal development in the mouse 

embryo. Curr Top Dev Biol 128:225 –262. 

59. Livernois AM, Graves JAM, Waters PD. 2012. The origin and evolution of vertebrate sex 

chromosomes and dosage compensation. Heredity 108:50 –58. 

60. Luckenbach JA, Yamamoto Y. 2018. Genetic and environmental sex determination in cold -

blooded vertebrates: fishes, amphibians, and reptiles. In: Skinner MK, editor. Encyclopedia of 

Reproduction, 2nd edn. Elsevier. p. 176 –183. 

61. Ma W -J, Veltsos P . 2021. The diversity and evolution of sex chromosomes in frogs. Genes 

12:1033. 

62. Maatouk DM et al. 2012. Germ cells are not required to establish the female pathway in mouse 

fetal gonads. Biol Reprod 87:35. 

63. Mäkelä JA et al. 2019. Testis development. Endocr Rev 40:857 –905. 

64. Malcom JW, Kudra RS, Malone JH. 2014. The sex chromosomes of frogs: variability and 

tolerance offer clues to genome evolution and function. Genomics 104:468 –476. 

65. Malcore RM. 2024. A comparative analysis of mouse imprinted and random X -chromosome 

inactivation. Chromosoma 133:1 –21. 

66. Mank JE, Ellegren H. 2009. All dosage compensation is local: gene -by -gene regulation of sex -

biased expression on the chicken Z chromosome. Heredity 102:312 –320. 20 

67. Martínez -Pacheco M, Díaz -Barba K, Pérez -Molina R, et al. 2024. Gene expression dynamics 

during temperature -dependent sex determination in a sea turtle. Dev Biol 514:99 –108. 

68. Matsuba C., Miura I., Merilä J. 2008. Disentangling genetic vs environmental causes of sex 

determination in the common frog Rana temporaria. BMC Genet 9:3. 

69. Matsuda M., Nagahama Y., Shinomiya A., Sato T., Matsuda C., Kobayashi T., Morrey C.E., 

Shibata N., Asakawa S., Shimizu N., et al. 2002. DMY is a Y -specific DM -domain gene required 

for male development in the medaka fish Oryzias latipes. Nature 417:559 –563. 

70. McQueen HA, Clinton M. 2009. Avian sex chromosomes: dosage compensation matters. 

Chromosome Res 17:681 –691. 

71. Metzger DCH, Sandkam BA, Darolti I, Mank JE. 2021. Rapid evolution of complete dosage 

compensation in Poecilia. Genome Biol Evol 13:evab155. 

72. Miller D, Bowden RM. 2004. Environmental versus genetic sex determination: a possible factor 

in reptilian extinction? Fertil Steril 81:958 –964. 

73. Nagahama Y., Chakraborty T., Paul -Prasanth B., Ohta K., Nakamura M. 2021. Sex 

determination, gonadal sex differentiation, and plasticity in vertebrate sex differentiation. 

Physiol Rev 101:1237 –1308. 

74. Naurin S, Hansson B, Bensch S, Hasselquist D. 2010. Why does dosage compensation differ 

between XY and ZW systems? Trends Genet 26:15 –20. 

75. Navarro -Martín L., Viñas J., Ribas L., Díaz N., Gutiérrez A., Di Croce L., Piferrer F. 2011. DNA 

methylation of the gonadal aromatase (cyp19a1a) promoter is involved in temperature -

dependent sex ratio shifts in the European sea bass. PLoS Genet 7:e1002447. 

76. Ohno S. 1967. Sex Chromosomes and Sex -Linked Genes. Springer, Berlin. 

77. Oikawa M, Makino T. 2014. Understanding the X -chromosome inactivation cycle in mice. 

Epigenetics 9:204 –211. 

78. Ospina -Álvarez N., Piferrer F. 2008. Temperature -dependent sex determination in fish revisited: 

prevalence, a single sex ratio response pattern, and possible effects of climate change. PLoS One 

3:e2837. 

79. Pan Q., Anderson J., Bertho S., Herpin A., Wilson C., Postlethwait J.H., Schartl M., Guiguen Y. 

2016. Vertebrate sex -determining genes play musical chairs. Dev Dyn 245:676 –687. 

80. Panda A, Petropoulos S. 2020. New insights into X-chromosome reactivation during 

reprogramming and in development. Chromosoma 129:327 –339. 

81. Pieau C., Dorizzi M., Richard -Mercier N. 1999. Temperature -dependent sex determination and 

gonadal differentiation in reptiles. Cell Mol Life Sci 55:887 –900. 

82. Potrzebowski L et al. 2008. Chromosomal gene movements reflect the recent origin and biology 

of therian sex chromosomes. PLoS Biol 6:e80. 

83. Rovatsos M, Praschag P, Fritz U, Kratochvíl L. 2017. Stable Cretaceous sex chromosomes 

enable molecular sexing in softshell turtles (Testudines: Trionychidae). Sci Rep 7:42150. 

84. Ruiz -García A., Bullejos M., Godoy J.A., López -Jurado L.F., Díaz -Paniagua C. 2021. Sex 

differentiation and sex reversal in amphibians: the effect of temperature. Sex Dev 15:1 57 -167 .

85. Russell A, et al. 2021. Evolutionary transition to XY sex chromosomes associated with Y -linked 

gene acquisition in mammals. Genome Biol Evol 13:evaa263. 

86. Sarre S.D., Georges A., Quinn A. 2004. The ends of a continuum: genetic and temperature -

dependent sex determination in reptiles. BioEssays 26:639 –645. 

87. Schield DR, Card DC, Hales NR, Perry BW, Pasquesi GM, et al. 2019. The origins and evolution 

of chromosomes, dosage compensation, and mechanisms underlying venom regulation in 

snakes. Genome Res 29:590 –601. 21 

88. Sekido R, Lovell -Badge R. 2008. Sex determination involves synergistic action of SRY and SF1 

on a specific Sox9 enhancer. Nature 453:930 –934. 

89. Setti PG et al. 2024. Evolution of bird sex chromosomes: a cytogenomic approach in 

Palaeognathae species . BMC Evol Biol 24:230. 

90. Shoemaker CM, Crews D. 2009. Analyzing the coordinated gene network underlying 

temperature -dependent sex determination in reptiles. Semin Cell Dev Biol 20:293 –303. 

91. Sigeman H et al. 2021. Avian neo -sex chromosomes reveal dynamics of recombination 

suppression and W degeneration. Mol Biol Evol 38:5275 –5289. 

92. Sigeman H, Ponnikas S, Chauhan P, Dierickx E, Brooke ML, Hansson B. 2018. Insights into 

avian incomplete dosage compensation: sex -biased gene expression in the collared flycatcher. 

BMC Genomics 19:955. 

93. Smith CA, Roeszler KN, Ohnesorg T, Cummins DM, Farlie PG, Doran TJ, Sinclair AH. 2009. 

The avian Z -linked gene DMRT1 is required for male sex determination in the chicken. Nature 

461:267 –271. 

94. Smith J.J., Voss S.R. 2009. Amphibian sex determination: segregation and linkage analysis 

using members of the tiger salamander species complex. Heredity 102:542 –548. 

95. Stévant I et al. 2019. Dissecting cell lineage specification and sex fate determination in gonadal 

somatic cells using single -cell transcriptomics. Cell Rep 26:3272 –3283. 

96. Stöck M, Beukeboom LW, Charlesworth D, Perrin N, Kikuchi K, et al. 2021. A brief review of 

vertebrate sex evolution with a pledge for integrative research: towards ‘sexomics’. Philos Trans 

R Soc Lond B 376:20200426. 

97. Sumida M., Nishioka M. 2000. Sex -linked genes and linkage maps in amphibians. Comp 

Biochem Physiol B 126:257 –270. 

98. Sun W, Yang H, Hui H, et al. 2025. RNA binding protein RBM20 regulates turtle temperature -

dependent sex determination by repressing the splicing of WT1 KTS. Sci Adv 11:eadv9587. 

99. Tanaka SS. 2014. Regulation of male sex determination: genital ridge formation and Sry 

activation in mice. Cell Mol Life Sci 71:4781 –4802. 

100. Tzung K.W., Goto R., Saju J.M., Sreenivasan R., Saito T., Arai K., Yamaha E., Hossain M.S., 

Calvert M.E., Orbán L. 2015. Early depletion of primordial germ cells in zebrafish promotes 

testis formation. Stem Cell Reports 4:61 –73. 

101. Uebbing S, Künstner A, Mäkinen H, Backström N, Bolivar P, Burri R, Nater A, Strand A, 

Ellegren H. 2013. Transcriptome sequencing reveals the character of incomplete dosage 

compensation across multiple tissues in flycatchers. Genome Biol Evol 5:1555 –1566. 

102. Uno Y, Nishida C, Oshima Y, Miura I, Matsuda Y, Nakamura M. 2024. The evolutionary 

journey of sex chromosomes in amphibians. J Exp Zool B 342:1 –18. 

103. Valenzuela N. 2004. Evolution and maintenance of temperature -dependent sex determination. 

In: Valenzuela N., Lance V.A., editors. Temperature -Dependent Sex Determination in 

Vertebrates. Washington (DC): Smithsonian Books. p. 131 –147. 

104. Warr N, Greenfield A. 2012. The molecular and cellular basis of gonadal sex reversal in mice 

and humans. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol 1:559 –577. 

105. Weber C, Capel B. 2021. Sex determination without sex chromosomes. Philos Trans R Soc 

Lond B Biol Sci 376:20200109. 

106. Webster TH, Wilson Sayres MA, Férnandez V, et al. 2023. Incomplete dosage balance and 

dosage compensation in the ZZ/ZW Gila monster (Heloderma suspectum). Genome Biol Evol 

15:evad093. 

107. Whiteley S.L., Holleley C.E., Castelli M.A., Georges A., Shine R. 2021. Sex reversal leads to 

sex chromosome turnover in a dragon lizard. Proc R Soc B 288:20202494. 22 

108. Whiteley SL, Holleley CE, Wagner S, Blackburn J, Deveson IW, Marshall Graves JA, Georges 

A. 2021. Two transcriptionally distinct pathways drive female development in a reptile with 

both genetic and temperature -dependent sex determination. PLoS Genet 17:e10 09465. 

109. Whiteley SL, Wagner S, Holleley CE, Deveson IW, Marshall Graves JA, Georges A. 2022. 

Truncated jarid2 and kdm6b transcripts are associated with temperature -induced sex reversal 

during development in a dragon lizard. Sci Adv 8:eabk0275. 

110. Yoshimoto S., Ikeda N., Izutsu Y., Shiba T., Takamatsu N., Ito M. 2010. Opposite roles of 

DMRT1 and its splice variant DMRT1bY in sexual dimorphism of Xenopus laevis. EMBO J 

29:1337 –1350. 

111. Yoshimoto S., Okada E., Umemoto H., Tamura K., Uno Y., Nishida -Umehara C., Matsuda Y., 

Takamatsu N., Shiba T., Ito M. 2008. A W -linked DM -domain gene, DM -W, participates in 

primary ovary development in Xenopus laevis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105:2469 –2474. 

112. Zhao L, Wang C, Lehman ML, Van den Hurk C, et al. 2018. Transcriptomic analysis of mRNA 

expression and alternative splicing during mouse sex determination. Mol Cell Endocrinol 

478:84 –96. 

113. Zhu Z -X, Dornburg A, Brandley MC, Wang Z, Yuan M -L, Zhang B -L, Yan P, Shen Y -Y. 2022. 

Diversity of reptile sex -chromosome evolution revealed by cytogenetic and genomic analyses. 

Mol Biol Evol 39:msac193. Kingdom Phylum Subphylum Superclass Class Order family genus 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Perciformes Gasterosteidae Pungitius 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Perciformes Gasterosteidae Pungitius 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Perciformes Gasterosteidae Pungitius 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Perciformes Gasterosteidae Culaea 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Perciformes Percidae 

Perca 

Sander 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Perciformes Scorpaenidae Sebastes 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Tetraodontiformes Tetraodontidae Takifugu 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Centrarchiformes Percichthyidae 

Siniperca 

Coreoperca 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Centrarchiformes Percichthyidae Macquaria 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Acanthuriformes Scatophagidae 

Scatophagus 

Selenotoca 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Beloniformes Adrianichthyidae Oryzias 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Beloniformes Adrianichthyidae Oryzias 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Beloniformes Hemiramphidae Hyporhamphus 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Cyprinodontiformes Nothobranchiidae Nothobranchius 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Cyprinodontiformes Poeciliidae Xiphophorus 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Cichliformes Cichlidae Bathybates 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Cichliformes Cichlidae 

Astatotilapia 

Protomelas 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Cichliformes Cichlidae 

Cyprichromis 

Paracyprichromis 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Cichliformes Cichlidae Pseudocrenilabrus 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Cichliformes Cichlidae Tilapia 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Cichliformes Cichlidae 

Coptodon 

Steatocranus 

Tilapia 

Oreochromis 

Sarotherodon 

# Table S1: The case studies where the sex chromosome turnover was reported across vertebrate major groups including mammals, birds, sish, Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Carangiformes Carangidae Trachinotus 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Carangiformes Carangidae Seriola 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Pleuronectiformes Pleuronectidae 

Cynoglossus 

Solea 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Syngnathiformes Syngnathidae Hippocampus 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Siluriformes Loricariidae Ancistrus 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Siluriformes Siluridae Silurus 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Actinopterygii Teleostei Cypriniformes Catostomidae Catostomus 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Tetrapoda Reptilia Squamata 

Carphodactylida 

e

Diplodactylidae 

Pygopodidae 

Eublepharidae 

Sphaerodactylid 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Tetrapoda Reptilia Squamata 

Leptotyphlopida 

e

Typhlopidae 

Tropidophiidae 

Sanzinidae 

Calabariidae 

Charinidae 

Erycidae 

Boidae 

Pythonidae 

Acrochordidae 

Xenodermatidae 

Pareidae 

Viperidae 

Homalopsidae 

Elapidae 

Lamprophiidae 

Myriopholis 

Xerotyphlops 

Tropidophis 

Acrantophis 

Sanzinia 

Calabaria 

Eryx 

Eunectes 

Chilabothrus 

Boa 

Python 

Acrochordus 

Xenodermus 

Pareas 

Crotalus 

Daboia 

Protobothrops 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Tetrapoda Reptilia Squamata Chamaeleonidae 

Chamaeleo 

Furcifer Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Tetrapoda Reptilia Squamata Carphodactylidae 

Nephrurus 

Saltuarius 

Underwoodisaurus 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Tetrapoda Reptilia Squamata Sphaerodactylidae Aristelliger 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Tetrapoda Reptilia Squamata Eublepharidae Coleonyx 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Tetrapoda Reptilia Squamata Corytophanidae Basilicus 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Tetrapoda Amphibia Anura Ranidae 

Rana 

Pelophylax 

Glandirana 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Tetrapoda Amphibia Anura Ranidae Odorrana 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Tetrapoda Amphibia Anura Ranidae Amolops 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Tetrapoda Amphibia Anura Ranidae Rana 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Tetrapoda Amphibia Anura Hylidae Hyla 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Tetrapoda Amphibia Anura Hylidae Hyla 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Tetrapoda Amphibia Anura Pipidae Xenopus 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Tetrapoda Amphibia Anura Bufonidae Bufo 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Tetrapoda Amphibia Caudata Proteidae 

Necturus 

Proteus 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Tetrapoda Amphibia Caudata Salamandridae Pleurodelinae 

Animalia Chordata Vertebrata Tetrapoda Mammalia Rodentia Muridae Tokudaia Heterogametic System Homomorphy Common name 

Turnov 

er 

events 

Nº species 

studied 

XY homomorphic (LG3) / heteromorphic (LG12) stickleback 1 2

XY | ZW Homomorphic stickleback 2 3

XY Homomorphic stickleback 1 2

XY homomorphic stickleback 1 2

XY homomorphic Perch 1 5

XY homomorphic Rockfish 4 8

XY homomorphic Pufferfish 3 12 

XY homomorphic Perch 1 4

XY homomorphic Perch 1 2

XY homomorphic Scat fish 2 3

XY | ZW homomorphic ricefish 4 13 

XY | ZW homomorphic ricefish 1 6

XY | ZW heteromorphic Japanese halfbeak 1 2

XY heteromorphic Elongate hatchetfish 4 6

XY | ZW NA Swordtail fish 1 2

XY | ZW homomorphic Cichlid 30 244 

XY | ZW homomorhpic Cichlid 2 6

XY | ZW homomorphic Cichlid 4 11 

XY | ZW NA Cichlid 6 7

XY | ZW NA Cichlid 5 13 

XY | ZW homomorphic Cichlid 4 6

# r groups including mammals, birds, sish, amphibians and non-avian reptiles. Chromosome fusion between old sex chromosomes and autosomes was not ZW homomorphic Pompano 2 3

ZW homomorphic Pompano 3 5

XY | ZW homomorphic (C. semilaevis hetero) Starry flounder 10 11 

XY homomorphic Seahorse 1 4

XY | ZW heteromorphic Catfish 1 2

XY homomorphic Silurus 2 7

XY homomorphic Sucker fish 1 3

XY | ZW homomorphic | heteromorphic Geckos 19 37 

XY | ZW homomorphic | heteromorphic Snake 7 56 

XY | ZW homomorphic | heteromorphic Chameleon 1 2ZW heteromorphic Gecko 13 63 

ZW homomorphic Gecko 1 4

XY | ZW homomorphic Gecko 1 4

XY heteromorphic Helmet Lizard 1 6

XY | ZW homomorphic True frogs 13 28 

XY | ZW homomorphic / heteromorphic True frogs 1 2

XY homomorphic Torrent frogs 1 9

XY homomorphic Tago's brown frog 2 2

XY | ZW homomorphic Tree frogs 1 3

XY | ZW homomorphic Tree frogs 4 10 

XY | ZW homomorphic African clawed frog 8 19 

XY | ZW homomorphic Toads 1 2

XY homomorphic / heteromorphic salamanders 1 10 

XY homomorphic newt 1 2

XY heteromorphic Amami spiny rat 1 1Citation 

Yi, X., Wang, D., Reid, K., Feng, X., Löytynoja, A., & Merilä, J. (2024). Sex chromosome turnover in hybridizing stickleback lineages. Evolution Letters, 8(5), 658–668. https://doi.org/10. 

Dixon, G., Kitano, J., & Kirkpatrick, M. (2018). The Origin of a New Sex Chromosome by Introgression between Two Stickleback Fishes. Molecular Biology and Evolution, 36(1), 28–38. h 

Liu, Z., Herbert, A. L., Chan, Y. F., Ku čka, M., Kingsley, D. M., & Peichel, C. L. (2025). The fourspine stickleback (Apeltes quadracus) has an XY sex chromosome system with polymorph 

Jeffries, D. L., Mee, J. A., & Peichel, C. L. (2022). Identification of a candidate sex determination gene in Culaea inconstans suggests convergent recruitment of an Amh duplicate in two l 

Kuhl, H., Euclide, P. T., Klopp, C., Cabau, C., Zahm, M., Lopez-Roques, C., Iampietro, C., Kuchly, C., Donnadieu, C., Feron, R., Parrinello, H., Poncet, C., Jaffrelo, L., Confolent, C., W 

Sykes, N. T. B., Kolora, S. R. R., Sudmant, P. H., & Owens, G. L. (2023). Rapid turnover and evolution of sex -determining regions in Sebastes rockfishes. Molecular Ecology, 32(18), 50 

Kabir, A., Ieda, R., Hosoya, S., Fujikawa, D., Atsumi, K., Tajima, S., Nozawa, A., Koyama, T., Hirase, S., Nakamura, O., Kadota, M., Nishimura, O., Kuraku, S., Nakamura, Y., Kobayashi, H 

Han, C., Liu, S., Peng, S., Liu, S., Zeng, J., Chen, J., Lin, H., Li, C., Li, S., & Zhang, Y. (2025). Assembly and analysis of Sinipercidae fish sex chromosomes reveals that a supergene drives 

Pavlova, A., Harrisson, K. A., Turakulov, R., Lee, Y. P., Ingram, B. A., Gilligan, D., Sunnucks, P., & Gan, H. M. (2021). Labile sex chromosomes in the Australian freshwater fish family Pe 

Huang, Y., Zhang, X., Bian, C., Jiao, K., Zhang, L., Huang, Y., Yang, W., Li, Y., Shi, G., Huang, Y., Tian, C., Chen, H., Deng, S., Zhu, C., Shi, Q., Li, G., & Jiang, D. (2025). Allelic variation an 

Ansai, S., Montenegro, J., Masengi, K. W. A., Nagano, A. J., Yamahira, K., & Kitano, J. (2022). Diversity of sex chromosomes in Sulawesian medaka fishes. Journal of Evolutionary Biolog 

Myosho, T., Takehana, Y., Hamaguchi, S., & Sakaizumi, M. (2015). Turnover of sex chromosomes in celebensis group Medaka Fishes. G3 Genes Genomes Genetics, 5(12), 2685–2691 

Xing, T., Li, Y., Yang, H., Charlesworth, D., & Liu, J. (2025). Extensive recombination suppression and genetic degeneration of a young ZW sex chromosome system in halfbeak fish. Mol 

Hospodá řská, M., Mora, P., Voleníková, A. C., Al -Rikabi, A., Altmanová, M., Simanovsky, S. A., Tolar, N., Pavlica, T., Jane čková, K., Štundlová, J., Bobryshava, K., Jankásek, M., Hi řman 

Franchini, P., Jones, J. C., Xiong, P., Kneitz, S., Gompert, Z., Warren, W. C., Walter, R. B., Meyer, A., & Schartl, M. (2018). Long-term experimental hybridisation results in the evolution o 

Taher, A. E., Ronco, F., Matschiner, M., Salzburger, W., & Böhne, A. (2021). Dynamics of sex chromosome evolution in a rapid radiation of cichlid fishes. Science Advances, 7(36), eabe 

Feller, A. F., Ogi, V., Seehausen, O., & Meier, J. I. (2021). Identification of a novel sex determining chromosome in cichlid fishes that acts as XY or ZW in different lineages. Hydrobiologia, 

Behrens, K. A., Koblmüller, S., & Kocher, T. D. (2022). Sex chromosomes in the tribe Cyprichromini (Teleostei: Cichlidae) of Lake Tanganyika. Scientific Reports, 12(1), 17998. https://d 

Behrens, K. A., Koblmueller, S., & Kocher, T. D. (2024). Diversity of sex chromosomes in vertebrates: Six novel sex chromosomes in basal haplochromines (Teleostei: Cichlidae). Geno 

Behrens, K. A., Zhao, Z., Kidd, M. R., Maluwa, A., Cnaani, A., Koblmüller, S., & Kocher, T. D. (2025). Before the East African radiation: sex chromosome systems in basal haplotilapiine c 

Smith, S. H., Kukowka, S., & Böhne, A. (2025). Investigation of sex determination in African cichlids reveals lack of fixed sex chromosomes in wild populations. Journal of Evolutionary 

# fusion between old sex chromosomes and autosomes was not included in the compiled case studies. Guo, L., Malara, D., Battaglia, P., Waiho, K., Davis, D. A., Deng, Y., Shen, Z., & Rao, K. (2024). Turnovers of Sex-Determining Mutation in the Golden Pompano and Related Species Prov 

Fan, B., Xie, D., Li, Y., Li, Y., Wang, X., Qi, X., Li, S., Meng, Z., Chen, X., Peng, J., Yang, Y., Li, Y., Li, Y., & Wang, L. (2021). A single intronic single nucleotide polymorphism in splicing site 

Wei-Jing, L., 中国水产科学研究院黄海水产究所海水养殖生物育种与可持续产出全国重点实验室山 . 青. 2. 中., Yu-Man, Z., Shuo, L., Yu-Yan, L., Chen, L., Sheng-Lei, H., Kai-Qian 

Long, X., Charlesworth, D., Qi, J., Wu, R., Chen, M., Wang, Z., Xu, L., Fu, H., Zhang, X., Chen, X., He, L., Zheng, L., Huang, Z., & Zhou, Q. (2022). Independent evolution of sex chromos 

De Oliveira, R. R., Feldberg, E., Anjos, M. B. D., & Zuanon, J. (2007). Occurrence of multiple sexual chromosomes (XX/XY1Y2 and Z1Z1Z2Z2/Z1Z2W1W2) in catfishes of the genus Ancis 

Zheng, S., Tao, H., Song, Y., Li, M., Yang, H., Li, J., Yan, H., Sheraliev, B., Tao, W., Peng, Z., Zhang, Y., & Wang, D. (2025). The origin, evolution, and translocation of sex chromosomes in 

Pyne, C. B., Campbell, J. N., McFarlane, S. E., & Mandeville, E. G. (2025). A novel sex-associated genomic region in Catostomus fish species. Journal of Heredity, 116(6), 759–770. htt 

Gamble, T., Coryell, J., Ezaz, T., Lynch, J., Scantlebury, D. P., & Zarkower, D. (2015). Restriction Site-Associated DNA Sequencing (RAD-seq) Reveals an Extraordinary Number of Transiti 

Pšeni čka, T., Augstenová, B., Frynta, D., Kornilios, P., Kratochvíl, L., & Rovatsos, M. (2024). Sex chromosome turnovers and stability in snakes. Molecular Biology and Evolution, 42(1 

Nielsen, S. V., Banks, J. L., Diaz, R. E., Trainor, P. A., & Gamble, T. (2018). Dynamic sex chromosomes in Old World chameleons (Squamata: Chamaeleonidae). Journal of Evolutionary Augstenová, B., Pensabene, E., Vesel ý, M., Kratochvíl, L., & Rovatsos, M. (2021). Are geckos special in sex determination? independently evolved differentiated ZZ/ZW sex chromosom 

Keating, S. E., Griffing, A. H., Nielsen, S. V., Scantlebury, D. P., & Gamble, T. (2020). Conserved ZZ/ZW sex chromosomes in Caribbean croaking geckos ( Aristelliger : Sphaerodactylida 

Keating, S. E., Greenbaum, E., Johnson, J. D., & Gamble, T. (2022). Identification of a cis -sex chromosome transition in banded geckos (Coleonyx, Eublepharidae, Gekkota). Journal of 

Nielsen, S. V., Guzmán-Méndez, I. A., Gamble, T., Blumer, M., Pinto, B. J., Kratochvíl, L., & Rovatsos, M. (2019). Escaping the evolutionary trap? Sex chromosome turnover in basilisks 

Jeffries, D. L., Lavanchy, G., Sermier, R., Sredl, M. J., Miura, I., Borzée, A., Barrow, L. N., Canestrelli, D., Crochet, P., Dufresnes, C., Fu, J., Ma, W., Garcia, C. M., Ghali, K., Nicieza, A. G., O 

Katsumi, T., Shams, F., Yanagi, H., Ohnishi, T., Toda, M., Lin, S., Mawaribuchi, S., Shimizu, N., Ezaz, T., & Miura, I. (2022). Highly rapid and diverse sex chromosome evolution in the Od 

Ping, J., Xia, Y., Ran, J., & Zeng, X. (2022). Heterogeneous evolution of sex chromosomes in the torrent frog genus Amolops. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 23(19), 11146 

Miura, I., Shams, F., Ohki, J., Tagami, M., Fujita, H., Kuwana, C., Nanba, C., Matsuo, T., Ogata, M., Mawaribuchi, S., Shimizu, N., & Ezaz, T. (2024). Multiple Transitions between Y Chrom 

Dufresnes, C., Brelsford, A., Baier, F., & Perrin, N. (2020). When sex chromosomes recombine only in the heterogametic sex: heterochiasmy and heterogamety inHylaTree frogs. Molecu 

Dufresnes, C., Borzée, A., Horn, A., Stöck, M., Ostini, M., Sermier, R., Wassef, J., Litvinchuck, S. N., Kosch, T. A., Waldman, B., Jang, Y., Brelsford, A., & Perrin, N. (2015). Sex-Chromoso 

Evans, B. J., Gvo ždík, V., Knytl, M., Cauret, C. M. S., Herrel, A., Greenbaum, E., Patel, J., Premachandra, T., Papenfuss, T. J., Parente, J., Horb, M. E., & Measey, J. (2024). Rapid sex chrom 

Dufresnes, C., Crochet, P., Rozenblut-Ko ścisty, B., Litvinchuk, S. N., Rodrigues, N., Perrin, N., & Jeffries, D. L. (2025). The Heterogametic Transition in European Bufo Toads Switches th 

Sessions, S. K., Mali, L. B., Green, D. M., Trifonov, V., & Ferguson-Smith, M. (2016). Evidence for sex chromosome turnover in proteid salamanders. Cytogenetic and Genome Research 

France, J., Babik, W., Cvijanovi ć, M., Dudek, K., Ivanovi ć, A., Vu čić, T., & Wielstra, B. (2025). Identification of Y-chromosome turnover in Newts fails to support a sex chromosome origin 

Turnover of mammal sex chromosomes in the Sry-deficient Amami spiny rat is due to male-specific upregulation of Sox9