Title: Supregraph: Enabling Information-Optimal Assembly Graph Representation of a Read Set

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.21951v1

Published Time: Mon, 27 Apr 2026 00:01:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 38

Markdown Content:
# Supregraph: Enabling Information-Optimal Assembly Graph Representation of a Read Set 

# Anton Bankevich 1,2,* 1Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA 

2Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA 

*anton.bankevich@psu.edu April 27, 2026 

Abstract 

The first step in any genome assembly algorithm entails the conversion from the domain of strings and overlaps to the language of graphs and paths, typically using one of the two conventional methods: de Bruijn graphs or overlap graphs. However, both standard approaches are known to have limitations. De Bruijn graphs fail to represent complete information from reads, while the overlap graphs often produce artificial breaks in contigs due to the necessity to discard contained reads as a preliminary step. In this work we present a mathematical model for genome assembly that provides a formal framework to determine what constitutes a correct conversion of a read set into an assembly graph under the assumption of error-free reads. We prove that a correct representation of a read set exists in the form of a new class of assembly graphs, which we call supregraphs. We show that supregraphs can be constructed by iteratively transforming de Bruijn graphs using the multiplexing procedure, previously employed in the genome assemblers LJA and Verkko. Finally, we demonstrate that, under a set of natural assumptions, supregraphs provide a foundation for constructing theoretically optimal genome assemblies. 

1

> arXiv:2604.21951v1 [q-bio.GN] 23 Apr 2026

# Introduction 

Genome assembly algorithms have historically been designed to tolerate high sequencing error rates. This was essential in the NGS era, when more than half of 100 bp Illumina reads in a library could contain errors, and became critical for PacBio CLR and Oxford Nanopore reads, which could exceed 10% error rates. The introduction of PacBio HiFi reads [1] and duplex nanopore sequencing [2] marked a major shift, delivering long reads with much higher accuracy (typically fewer than one error per 500 nucleotides). Asingle HiFi library is sufficient to produce a human genome assembly more contiguous and accurate than earlier assemblies, which required multiple data types and manual curation [1]. But does this mean the genome assembly problem is finally solved? With increased power come more ambitious goals: we are no longer satisfied with assembling a few complete chromosome arms. We now aim for complete, diploid (or even polyploid) telomere-to-telomere assemblies [3–5]. These ambitious objectives shift the primary challenge of genome assembly away from handling sequencing errors toward accurately reconstructing the most complex and repetitive regions of the genome. Centromeres, sex chromosomes, immunoglobulin loci, and other regions with complex evolutionary histories feature tandem or mosaic repeat structures that remain difficult to assemble, even with nearly error-free sequencing data. Consequently, assemblies of such regions often contain structural flaws [6]. In this paper, we set aside the problem of sequencing errors and focus instead on the question that grows increasingly important as read accuracy improves: how to reliably assemble a complex genomic region from error-free data. In practice, assembly algorithms must still account for sequencing errors. However, we argue that the quality of modern reads is high enough that treating genome assembly as an error-free problem provides a sufficiently accurate and useful approximation of real-world conditions. Intuitively, the error-free genome assembly problem can be stated as follows: given a set of substrings of an unknown string s that together cover s, reconstruct s. While this formulation captures the essence of the assembly problem, it does not specify what constitutes a correct or optimal reconstruction. By invoking Occam’s razor, one might define the simplest (or shortest) possible superstring as the correct answer, leading to the Shortest Superstring Problem (SSP) [7]. Although the SSP was initially regarded as a mathematical model of genome assembly, it later became evident that the principle of Occam’s razor fails in this context, owing to the highly repetitive nature of genomic sequences [8]. Moreover, the SSP formulation fails to capture important aspects of real assembly scenarios, such as the fact that sequencing reads may not contain enough information to reconstruct the complete genome. Graph-based formulations offer alternative models [9–12], where chromosomes are encoded as walks in a graph. The most widely used graphs include de Bruijn graphs [13], overlap graphs [8], and adaptations such as string graphs [14], sparse de Bruijn graphs [15], and repeat graphs [16]. However, these graphs do not fully represent the information from a read set: k-mer-based graphs discard substantial sequence context, while overlap graphs require discarding of subreads, which can introduce artificial breaks in chromosome paths [3, 17–19]. This issue is amplified in diploid genomes with variable read lengths [19]. While this limitation has motivated several practical solutions [20, 21], we argue that the root cause of the problem lies in an incomplete theoretical understanding of the graph models underlying genome assembly. Notably, the same problems arise even under idealized assumptions of error-free, fully covering reads. Motivated by these considerations, we focus on the theoretical foundations of the genome assembly problem. We analyze the information traditionally extracted from a read set by assembly algorithms and propose a natural and precise representation of this information using an assembly graph. The algorithms presented are intended primarily to make the introduced concepts rigorous and are not designed with computational efficiency as a goal. Accordingly, memory- and time-efficient implementations are beyond the scope of this paper and will be described elsewhere. In Sections 1 and 2 we present a mathematical framework that formalizes the correctness of representing a read set as a graph. Sections 3 and 4 investigate the properties of graphs that can provide a perfect representation of a read set, leading to the introduction of supregraphs , a new type of assembly graph that perfectly preserves information from reads (Section 5). In Section 6 we further adapt it to reflect the practical genome assembly problem by incorporating constraints on the number of substring occurrences and describe a supregraph construction method based on an iterative process called multiplexing . Heuristic variants of the multiplexing algorithm have already been implemented in practice by the LJA [22] and Verkko [23] assemblers to resolve repeats in de Bruijn graphs. Finally, we describe a supregraph-based approach for 2constructing an optimal (but possibly incomplete) genome assembly under general assumptions (Section 7). Technical details and proofs of all theorems are provided in the appendix. 

# 1 Preliminaries 

Simplifying assumptions. In this work, we make three simplifying assumptions. (I) All reads are error-free and therefore substrings of the genome string. (II) To avoid edge cases caused by chromosomes ending in repeats [12], we treat all chromosomes as cyclic. (III) We ignore the double-stranded nature of DNA and represent sequences and graphs as directed. (I) is required to construct a deterministic genome assembly model; methods for handling sequencing errors are beyond the scope of this paper. (II) and (III) are introduced to simplify formulations. However, all definitions and results extend naturally to bidirected strings and graphs (Appendix A1). Appendix A2 discusses how the presented theory can be applied to genomes with linear chromosomes. 

Strings, string-sets, and chains. Most objects in this paper are strings over an alphabet Σ, which we take to be any finite set of symbols, not just the nucleotide alphabet {A, C, G, T }. We also consider cyclic strings, representing circular chromosomes, denoted ⟨s⟩ (e.g., ⟨ACCAT ⟩). Standard notions such as position and substring extend naturally to this setting; formal definitions accounting for cyclic strings are provided in Appendix A3. Let s be a string that has a string t as both a prefix and a suffix, so that s = tx = yt . We define the circularization of s through the overlap t to be the circular string ⟨x⟩. Observe that ⟨x⟩ = ⟨y⟩,since the strings x and y are cyclic shifts of one another. Many objects we consider (read libraries, genomes, assemblies) are collections of strings, which we call 

string-sets . A string-set is cyclic if it contains only cyclic strings. A string s is a substring of a string-set S

if s is a substring of at least one string of S. A string-set S is said to be substring-free if no string in it is a substring of another. In addition to substrings, we introduce the notion of a proper infix . A string s is a proper infix of a string 

t if t = asb for some non-empty strings a and b. A string-set is proper infix-free if no element is a proper infix of another. In contrast to a substring-free set, a proper infix-free set permits prefix and suffix relations between elements. A chain is a sequence of strings r1, . . . , r n with overlaps t1, . . . , t n−1, where ri and ri+1 overlap by ti

characters. A chain is cyclic if r1 = rn, and a k-chain if all overlaps have length at least k. The label of a (cyclic) chain, Label (C), is the (cyclic) string formed by merging the strings according to their overlaps. We will also refer to Label (C) as a combined sequence (in contrast to a concatenated sequence) of r1, . . . , r n

when the overlap values are clear from context. When all strings in a chain are elements of a read set (a finite, non-cyclic string-set, given as an input for genome assembly), we call them read chains. Fig. 1A illustrates a read set and a cyclic 3-chain. The chain uses each read in the set exactly once but in general reads may be reused multiple times in a read chain. 

Assembly graphs. We introduce a general definition for assembly graphs that encompasses all traditional assembly graph types. 

Definition 1. An abstract assembly graph is a directed graph where each vertex and edge is labeled with a string over a given alphabet. For each edge e from vertex u to vertex v, u is a prefix of e and v is a suffix of 

e.

For simplicity, we will identify edges and vertices with their labels. E.g., we say “ u is a prefix of e” rather than “the label of u is a prefix of the label of e”. In Appendix A4 we discuss how we interpret the assembly graph definition to take cyclic strings into account. We intentionally allow an edge to go from a vertex to its suffix ( suffix edge ) or from a prefix of a string to its full version ( prefix edge ). Although prefix and suffix edges do not occur in any traditional assembly graphs, our model requires their introduction. The definition of abstract assembly graphs is intentionally broad and permits certain degenerate config-urations that are not relevant for our purposes. We therefore introduce a more restrictive notion. 

Definition 2. An assembly graph is an abstract assembly graph in which every vertex and every edge lies on at least one directed cycle, and no edge is simultaneously a prefix edge and a suffix edge. 

Every abstract assembly graph can be converted into an assembly graph by first removing all vertices and edges that do not lie on any directed cycle, and then contracting every edge that is simultaneously a prefix edge and a suffix edge. 3Walks in assembly graphs. Walks and circuits in an assembly graph can be naturally associated with chains and cyclic chains, consisting of edge labels with overlaps defined by vertex labels. The label of a walk or circuit P , denoted as Label (P ), is the label of the corresponding chain. Vertices and edges are allowed to occur multiple times in a circuit, but we only consider circuits that are primitive (i.e., not formed by repeating a shorter circuit). For walks P and Q such that the end of P coincides with the start of Q, we denote their concatenation by P Q . We say that a walk P is an inner subwalk of a walk Q if Q = AP B for some non-empty walks A and B.A key property traditionally attributed to assembly graphs is that the true genome corresponds to a path in the graph, called a genome path . We adopt this notion, while emphasizing that under the assumption of cyclic chromosomes, a genome “path” is in fact a circuit or a collection of circuits. Nevertheless, we refer to it as a genome path regardless of its actual structure. We distinguish between a genome path and a 

chromosome path , the latter denoting a cycle that corresponds to a single chromosome of the genome. 

Figure 1: Assembly graphs . (A) An example of a cyclic read chain and its label. (B) Raw overlap graph, constructed from all reads including a contained read GCGA highlighted in red. (C) String graph obtained from raw overlap graph by removing one contained read and one transitive edge, highlighted in red. (D) De Bruijn graph. (E) Condensed de Bruijn graph, obtained from de Bruijn graph by transforming each unbranching path into a single edge. 

Traditional assembly graph types. We briefly introduce traditional types of assembly graphs. In overlap graphs vertices are labeled by non-contained reads (reads that are not substrings of any other reads), and edges represent overlaps between them. Although edges are not traditionally labeled by strings, they can be assigned the combined sequence of their endpoints joined by the overlap. This represents overlap graphs as an abstract assembly graph, denoted OG( R). We also introduce Raw Overlap Graph , ROG( R), that uses all reads, including the contained ones (Fig. 1B). A string graph , SG( R), is obtained from OG( R)by removing transitive edges, whose sequences duplicate labels of longer paths sharing the start and end vertex with the edge (Fig. 1C). In de Bruijn graphs (DBG( R, k )) vertices are k-mers and edges are ( k + 1)-mers connecting their k-mer prefixes and suffixes (Fig. 1D). Condensing each non-branching path into a single edge yields the Condensed de Bruijn Graph , denoted CDBG( R, k ) (Fig. 1E). Both DBG( R, k ) and CDBG (R, k ) have vertex and edge labels that satisfy our assembly graph definition. 

# 2 Logic of graph-based genome assembly 

Genome candidates. A read set may not contain enough information to uniquely reconstruct the genome. Thus the correct genome sequence cannot be assumed to always be the output of the genome assembly problem. A common practical solution is to output contigs, which are the longest substrings of the genome 4confidently inferred from reads. However, contigs are an artificial construct introduced for convenience in downstream analysis, and would not naturally arise in a model aiming to reflect the process of sequencing. Establishing a direct relationship between the input (reads) and the output (contigs) is therefore difficult. To address this, we introduce the notion of a genome candidate : formally, a genome candidate is any collection of cyclic strings. Intuitively we expect that a genome candidate could have generated the given read set through the sequencing process. This allows us to formally separate the assembly task into two steps: (i) characterize all genome candidates consistent with the reads, and (ii) derive contigs as the longest substrings shared by all genome candidates. Formalization of step (ii) is straightforward: 

Definition 3. For a set of genome candidates C, optimal assembly is a substring-free string-set OA (C),which consists of maximal strings that are substrings of every genome candidate ( contigs ). 

Formalizing step (i) requires explicitly stating all conditions that we expect a read set to impose on the properties of a candidate genome. 

Deriving assumptions on genome candidates from conventional logic of genome assembly tools. 

An overlap graph is often considered the most faithful representation of a read set because it allows a natural mapping of read chains, collectively containing all reads as substrings, to paths that visit every vertex. In other words, it represents genome candidates (’cyclic chains containing all reads’) as genome path candidates 

(’circuits visiting every vertex’). We decompose this definition of genome candidates into three simpler assumptions: 

Chain condition . Every chromosome in a genome candidate is a label of a cyclic read chain. Typically, consecutive reads are expected to overlap by at least k bases, where k is a constant chosen based on sequencing depth and read length. To simplify notation, we absorb the parameter k into the alphabet by working over the alphabet of all k-mers. An overlap of length at least 1 in the k-mer alphabet corresponds to an overlap of length at least k in the original nucleotide alphabet. For clarity, however, examples are presented in nucleotide form. 

Topology condition ( T). Genome has exactly one cyclic chromosome. This is just an example of a possible topology constraint that could be used to characterize the structure of genome candidates. Biological context or experiments (such as karyotyping) can provide additional informa-tion about the genome organization, including the number and form of chromosomes and their approximate lengths. We will denote all topology information by T.

Containment condition . Every non-contained read is a substring of the genome candidate. It suffices to ensure that non-contained reads are substrings of the genome, since all other reads are contained within them and are therefore also genome substrings. This condition is closely related to another type of information that can be used to characterize genome candidates: 

Multiplicity condition ( M). For each string s from a given collection of sequences, the number of occurrences of s in the genome can assume a limited set of values, defined by M(s). Containment is the simplest example of a multiplicity condition, which requires that the multiplicity of each read sequence be at least 1. However, sequencing reads encode additional information that can also be expressed naturally in the form of multiplicity conditions. Under the assumption of nearly uniform coverage, the multiplicities of substrings can be estimated from read coverage, although such estimates are inherently probabilistic. Because our model is deterministic, we do not attempt to model this estimation process. Instead, we treat multiplicity information as given, via a function M that assigns sequence s with the set of allowed occurrences of s in the genome. For example, if a sequence s is known to be present exactly once in the genome (i.e., unique ), absent from the genome, or present in the genome at least once, then M(s) is 

{1}, {0}, or Z+, respectively. We acknowledge that including multiplicity conditions as part of the assembly input may appear counter-intuitive. In practice, conclusions about sequence multiplicity are often derived during the assembly process itself. For instance, a long edge in a de Bruijn graph may be treated as unique because the probability of an exact long repeat in a genome is low. Similarly, in a string graph edge between two reads r1 and r2 may be discarded if overlap between them is too short, which can be interpreted as assigning multiplicity 0 to the combined sequence of r1 and r2.In our framework, we assume that all such probabilistic analyses have already been performed. The focus of the model is therefore not on how multiplicity information is inferred, but on what can be formally deduced from the collection of multiplicity constraints once they are given. 5Mathematical model of genome assembly. We argue that chain, containment, multiplicity, and topol-ogy conditions encompass all information types available for single long-read library assembly (see ap-pendix A5 for discussion). Other sequencing data types may impose different types of constraints on genome candidates, but these lie beyond the scope of this paper. We thus formalize the mathematical model of genome assembly as follows: each instance of the genome assembly problem is defined by a read set R, a set of multiplicity conditions M, and a set of topology conditions T. Genome candidate is defined as a col-lection of read chain labels (chromosome sequences) that satisfies the multiplicity and topology conditions. The set of all genome candidates is denoted as GC( R|M, T). The optimal set of contigs is then derived as OA(GC( R|M, T)). Genome assembly thus reduces to computing this value efficiently in time and space despite the potential infinitude of the set GC( R|M, T). 

Representing genome assembly as a graph problem. The chain condition plays a different role com-pared to multiplicity and topology conditions. It defines the building blocks of a genome candidate (possible chromosome sequences), and thus determines the space of genome candidates as collections of chromosome candidates . By contrast, the multiplicity and topology conditions restrict this space. This distinction is mir-rored in graph models: chromosome candidates map to circuits, defining the space of genome path candidates 

as sets of circuits, while the containment condition imposes constraints on the presence of vertices in these paths. We therefore define a graph-based representation of a genome assembly problem instance as a two-step process. First, the assembly graph must be constructed that fully preserves the space of possible chromosome candidates as circuit labels. Second, multiplicity constraints ( M) must be encoded as vertex and edge occurrence restrictions ( N). To formalize this, we introduce the following definitions. 

Definition 4. A Chromosome Candidate (CC) is a label of a cyclic read-chain, that consists of reads from a read set R. We denote the set of all cyclic read-chains as Chains (R) and the set of their labels as CC (R).

Definition 5. A Chromosome Path Candidate (CPC) is a label of a circuit in an assembly graph G. We denote the set of circuits in an assembly graph as Circuits (G) and the set of their labels as CPC (G). Given a function N : V (G) ∪ E(G) → 2N0 , which specifies occurrence constraints on vertices and edges, and a set of topology constraints T, we define GP C (G|N, T) as the set of all genome path candidates, composed of circuits in G, that satisfy the multiplicity and topology constraints specified by N and T.

Definition 6. We say that an assembly graph G is a chromosome candidate-preserving representation of a read set R if CC (R) = CPC (G). We say that G, N provide a genome candidate-preserving representation 

of a read set R and multiplicity conditions M if GC (R|M) = Labels (GP C (G|N)). 

We do not include topology conditions in the last definition since they are the easiest to represent in a graph form: the number and lengths of chromosomes directly translate into the number and lengths of circuits. Therefore, for any genome candidate-preserving representation ( G, N) of ( R, M), for any set of topology constraints T we have GC (R|M, T) = GP C (G|N, T). 

Contig preservation. The final step of graph-based genome assembly is to extract optimal assembly from graph-based representation of genome candidates. This part can also be done in terms of the assembly graph. 

Definition 7. For a collection of genome path candidates P, optimal graph-based assembly is the subwalk-free set of walks OGA (P), consisting of all maximal paths that are subpaths of every genome path candidate. 

Instead of looking for optimal contigs we can look for optimal contig paths, which is a generally simpler task. This concludes the description of graph-based approach to solving the optimal genome assembly prob-lem formulated above. Figure 2 illustrates how the natural assumptions linking the read set to genome can-didates translate into a graph-based pipeline for genome assembly. Practical graph-based genome-assembly tools do not always follow this pipeline explicitly, but the rationale behind their decisions is usually grounded in this underlying logic. In Figure 2 the top path from reads to contigs through chromosome and genome candidates represents the mathematical model of genome assembly we introduced. The bottom path from reads to contigs through the assembly graph and genome path candidates represents graph-based approach to genome assembly. For the graph-based approach to function correctly, this diagram must be commutative: the composition of functions along any directed path with the same start and end points must yield the same result. Two of the three conditions that ensure commutativity (CC( R) = CPC( G) and GC (R|M, T) = GP C (G|N, T)) have already been introduced as the chromosome candidate preservation and genome candidate preservation properties, respectively. The remaining relation derived from the diagram is OA ◦ Labels = Labels ◦ OGA, 6Figure 2: Logic of graph-based genome assembly . The general assumptions about genome candidates are divided into two parts: a description of the chromosome-candidate space and additional constraints based on genome topology ( T) and estimated sequence multiplicities ( M). This division is reflected in graph-based assembly by chromosome candidates being represented as circuits in the graph, while the remaining constraints are translated into bounds on vertex occurrences in the genome path ( N) and restrictions on its topology ( T). Optimal contig paths can then be inferred from the genome-candidate set as the longest walks shared by all genome-path candidates. Variations of details specific to de Bruijn graphs, overlap graphs, and supregraphs are highlighted in yellow, blue, and red correspondingly. meaning that for any set of genome path candidates P, OA(Labels( P)) = Labels(OGA( P)). We refer to this property as contig preservation .These three conditions form the backbone of a formally correct genome assembly and provide us with a problem statement: does a chromosome candidate, genome candidate, and contig-preserving representation exist for each genome assembly problem instance? In the remainder of the paper, we discuss the implications and limitations of these conditions, explain why existing assembly graphs fail to satisfy them, and show how to construct a new type of assembly graph that satisfies them as precisely as possible. 

# 3 Contig preservation implies properties of assembly graphs 

Weak contig preservation. The contig-preservation condition is surprisingly difficult to satisfy. Assembly graphs direct attention to path labels, whereas optimal contigs may be shorter than even individual vertex labels, preventing the identification of short optimal contigs. We thus restrict our focus to a weaker notion: 

Definition 8. An assembly graph satisfies the weak contig preservation condition if for any set of genome path candidates P, OA (Labels (P)) ⊆ Labels (OGA (P)) .

In other words, in a weakly contig-preserving graph, the labels of optimal contig paths are optimal contigs, although not all optimal contigs may be found in this way. 

Conditions for weak contig preservation. We introduce two conditions related to weak contig preser-vation: one necessary and one sufficient. A simple exact criterion of weak contig preservation is difficult to obtain, as some pathological graph structures satisfy it (see appendix A6). 7Definition 9. A graph is splitting if labels of edges that start at the same vertex v (or end at the same vertex u) diverge immediately after v (or immediately before u). 

By assembly graph definition, labels of all edges outgoing from v share Label (v) as a prefix. In splitting graphs this restriction is stronger: the outgoing edge labels must diverge immediately after that shared prefix. De Bruijn graphs are splitting; overlap and string graphs are not. 

Definition 10. An assembly graph G is non-redundant if whenever P and Q are walks in G such that 

Label (P ) is a proper infix of Label (Q), the walk P occurs as an inner subwalk of Q.

This condition prevents the same sequence from labeling distinct walks. Although it could be stated in terms of substrings and subwalks for conventional assembly graphs, the presence of prefix and suffix edges necessitates a formulation using proper infixes and inner subwalks instead (see Appendix A6). Non-redundancy is also critical for relating vertex occurrences in a circuit to substring occurrences in its label: 

Theorem 1. In a non-redundant graph, for any circuit C and vertex v, the number of occurrences of v in 

C equals the number of occurrences of Label (v) in Label (C).

De Bruijn graphs, condensed de Bruijn graphs, and string graphs are non-redundant. Raw overlap graphs are typically redundant because subreads and transitive edges cause the same sequence to label different paths. The following theorem links these structural properties with weak contig preservation: 

Theorem 2. Every weakly contig-preserving assembly graph is splitting. Every splitting, non-redundant graph is weakly contig-preserving. 

Thus, splitting is necessary for weak contig preservation, and splitting combined with non-redundancy is sufficient. This is not an exact characterization, since some redundant graphs are nevertheless weakly contig-preserving. However, we choose to focus on non-redundant graphs because Theorem 1 allows multiplicity conditions to be translated into graph constraints and thereby ensures genome path preservation (Section 6). 

Does an assembly graph have to be weakly contig preserving? String graphs are not splitting, and the labels of optimal contig paths in string graphs require additional post-processing to be converted into optimal contigs. Thus, in practice, it is possible to compensate for the lack of the splitting property. However, we will show that such post-processing is unnecessary, since any non-redundant assembly graph can be transformed into a splitting graph (see section 5). The final theorem of this section shows that inability to reconstruct short contigs that do not contain vertices as substrings is the only limitation of assembly graph-based approach based on weakly contig-preserving graphs. 

Definition 11. For string-sets S and V , we define Superstrings (S, V ) as the set of strings from S that contain at least one string from V as a substring. 

Theorem 3. For any non-redundant splitting assembly graph G and a set of genome path candidates P,Labels (OGA (P)) = Superstrings (OA (Labels (P)) , V (G)) .

.

From this theorem, we can conclude that a non-redundant splitting graph becomes contig-preserving if each optimal contig contains at least one vertex label as a substring. Theorem 3 is a natural limitation of graph-based approaches. This section introduced key properties of assembly graphs that substantially reduce the search space for chromosome candidate, genome candidate, and contig-preserving representation of a genome assembly problem instance. In the next section, we begin constructing such a representation, incorporating the insights developed here. 

# 4 Chromosome candidate preservation and conductor strings. 

In this section, we address the question of whether cyclic read-chain labels can be perfectly represented as labels of graph circuits: CC( R) = CPC( G). We begin by examining this property in conventional assembly graph models: 8Theorem 4. For read set R

CPC (OG (R)) = CPC (SG (R)) ⊆ CPC (ROG (R)) = CC (R) ⊆ CPC (DBG (R, k )) .

Moreover, each of these inclusions is strict for some read sets. 

Figure 1 illustrates strict inclusions. The cyclic chain CAGCG - GCGA - CGACAC - CACGAT -CGATTAC - TACAGC has label ⟨CAGCGACACGATTA ⟩, which does not appear in the string graph in Fig. 1C because the read GCGA was removed as contained. The de Bruijn graph in Fig. 1D includes a circuit labeled with ⟨GACAGC ⟩ that is not the label of any read chain. Consequently, neither the string graph nor the de Bruijn graph provides a chromosome-candidate-preserving representation for the read set in Fig. 1A. String graphs fail this property specifically due to artificial gaps introduced by contained-read filtering. The raw overlap graph is chromosome-preserving but remains highly redundant and not splitting. 

Existence of a chromosome candidate-preserving representation. To examine whether a chromo-some candidate-preserving representation exists, we consider the following problem. Let C denote an arbi-trary cyclic string-set. Does there exist a non-redundant assembly graph G such that C = CPC( G)? In this formulation, we temporarily disregard the expectation that the chromosome candidate set is constructed as the labels of read chains and instead treat it as an unconstrained set of cyclic strings. The answer is trivially positive: one can always construct such a graph by representing each cyclic string from C as an isolated loop. The essential question is whether there exists a finite graph with this property, since the set C is generally infinite. As shown below, this question has a simple and explicit characterization based on the following string property, which will become fundamental for further discussion. 

Definition 12. A string v is called a conductor for a cyclic string-set C if, for any pair of strings va, vb ,that both start and finish with v (va = a′v, vb = b′v), ⟨ab ⟩ ∈ C if and only if both ⟨a⟩ ∈ C and ⟨b⟩ ∈ C.

Although this definition may appear puzzling for an arbitrary chromosome-set C, it becomes natural when C consists of circuit labels of an assembly graph. Indeed, in a non-redundant graph, any two walks that start and end at the same vertex v, with labels va and vb , can be concatenated into a single walk labeled 

vab that also starts and ends at v. The corresponding circuits then have cyclic labels ⟨a⟩ and ⟨b⟩ for the original walks, and ⟨ab ⟩ for the concatenated one. Hence, if C = CPC( G), every vertex label satisfies the conductor condition. The following theorem formalizes and expands this intuition. 

Theorem 5. For any non-redundant assembly graph G, the following strings are conductors for C =

CPC (G): (i) any superstring of a conductor; (ii) any vertex, edge, or walk label in G; (iii) any string that is not a substring of C; (iv) any string that is at least as long as the longest edge label in G.

This theorem provides us with an important necessary condition: if a chromosome-set C can be repre-sented in the form of circuit labels of a finite assembly graph, then every sufficiently long string is a conductor with respect to C. This sufficient condition is also necessary: 

Theorem 6. If there exists K, such that any string of length K is a conductor with respect to chromosome-set C, then CPC (DBG (C, K )) = C.

Combining theorems 5 and 6 allows us to formulate the criterion: 

Criterion 1. A chromosome-set can be represented as the set of circuits in a finite non-redundant assembly graph if and only if it is finitely conducting (if all sufficiently long strings are conductors with respect to C). 

We apply this criterion to a set of read chain labels. 

Theorem 7. If R is a read set with maximal read length L, then every string of length 2L and every non-contained read is a conductor with respect to CC (R).

Combining theorem 7 with the formulated criterion implies that every read set has a chromosome-preserving representation in the form of a de Bruijn graph. It is important to note that this de Bruijn graph is not constructed from reads, but rather from chains of reads and the value of k in this graph matches twice the size of the longest read. This graph is fundamentally different from the traditional de Bruijn graph, where 

k is much smaller than the read length and k-mers are extracted only from reads. Such representation is theoretically valid but the size of this graph can easily be exponential in the number of reads. Our next goal is to identify the minimal graph provides a chromosome-preserving representation of a given chromosome-set. The set of languages encodable by de Bruijn graphs is a well studied class of subregular languages called Strictly Locally Testable (SL) languages [24–26]. We have shown that labels of overlapping chains represent a subclass of SL languages. 95 Supregraph 

Non-redundant assembly graphs are defined by their vertices. Based on Section 3 conclusions, we choose to search for the minimal graph representing a chromosome-set among non-redundant splitting graphs. Our input for this problem is the set of chromosome candidates C. We note that conventional assembly graphs are defined by the class of strings that can serve as vertices in the graph (e.g. reads or k-mers). We generalize this logic to describe an abstract class of assembly graphs defined by a proper infix-free set of possible vertex labels V . The algorithm 1 provides a universal way for constructing non-redundant assembly graphs: 

Algorithm 1: AG( C, V )

G ← empty graph; 

foreach C ∈ C do 

O ← { (v, p ) | v ∈ V occurs in C at position p};Sort O by position p along C;

foreach consecutive pair (v1, p 1), (v2, p 2) in O do 

Add v1 and v2 to G;Add edge v1 → v2 with label C[p1 : p2 + |v2|] to G;

return G;In algorithm 1 we consider the cyclic sequence of occurrences of vertex labels from V in chromosome candidates from C and turn each such sequence into a circuit. All such circuits are collected together and glued according to vertex and edge labels to form the resulting assembly graph AG (C, V ). Different choices of 

V produce familiar graph families: reads, k-mers, minimizer k-mers, or junction k-mers yield string graphs, de Bruijn graphs, sparse de Bruijn graphs, or compressed de Bruijn graphs, respectively. Although we present 

AG (C, V ) as pseudocode, the chromosome candidate set can be potentially infinite. Therefore, this algorithm should be viewed primarily as a mathematical construct, describing the relationship between chromosome candidates and non-redundant assembly graphs that could represent them. The following theorem analyzes the expected outcomes of this procedure. 

Theorem 8. 1. For any non-redundant assembly graph G, we have AG (CPC (G), V (G)) = G.2. For any infix-free string-set v and chromosome-set C AG (C, V ) is a non-redundant graph. 3. Let C be a cyclic string-set, and let V be a proper infix-free set of strings such that every string in C contains at least one element of V as a substring. Then C ⊆ CPC (AG (C, V )) , and for any other non-redundant assembly graph G satisfying C ⊆ CPC (G) and V (AG (C, V )) ⊆ V (G), we have 

C ⊆ CPC (AG (C, V )) ⊆ CPC (G).

The first two statements of theorem 8 show that a graph can be represented as AG (C, V ) for certain C

and V if and only if it is non-redundant. The third statement shows that AG (C, V ) provides the most precise representation of the chromosome candidate set among all graphs with the same or larger vertex set. 

Multiplicity-extremal substrings. Traditional vertex label choices share a limitation: they are defined independently of the chromosome candidate set they aim to represent. In k-mer graphs, k is arbitrary; in string graphs, labels depend on a specific read set, even though different read sets can yield the same chromosome candidate set. To address this, we define vertex labels directly from the chromosome-set. Since an assembly graph reflects genome repeat structure, vertex labels should also capture it. We base our choice on maximal exact matches (MEMs) [27], commonly used in bioinformatics. Since MEMs usually refer to pairs of substring occurrences rather than substrings themselves, for clarity we introduce a separate concept: 

Definition 13. A string s is a Multiplicity-Extremal Substring ( MES ) for a chromosome-set C if s is a substring of C and any proper superstring of s has fewer occurrences than s in at least one chromosome candidtes from C.

For a finite text we could make proper superstrings of s to have fewer occurrences in the whole text. Since C is a potentially infinite set, we must be careful and specify that the number of occurrences is reduced in at least one chromosome candidate. The following theorem provides a criterion for MES, which does not have this issue. 10 Theorem 9. A finite string s is MES for a chromosome-set C if and only if there exist characters c1̸ = c2

and c3̸ = c4, such that c1s, c2s, sc 3, and sc 4 are substrings of C.

The following theorem shows that every string can be extended to a MES with the same collection of occurrences in chromosome candidates. 

Theorem 10. For any substring s of a chromosome-set C, there exists a unique MES, denoted M ES (s)

( MES extension of s), such that s occurs exactly once in M ES (s) as a substring and every occurrence of s

in C extends to an occurrence of M ES (s).

Strings with the same MES extension form an equivalency class of strings that always occur together in any chromosome or genome candidate. Figure 3A illustrates the notion of MES for the chromosome candidate set generated as read chains from the read set shown in Fig. 1A. The label of a cyclic chain that contains all reads is written on the matrix diagonal. Potentially this matrix is infinite since the label is cyclic and we show only a part of it. Every cell corresponds to a substring of the genome, for which start and end positions are defined by the cell’s coordinates. We draw a line to the right or on top of a cell corresponding to a substring that cannot be extended in that direction without reducing its number of occurrences in CC( R). Thus, every cell with lines both to the right and on top corresponds to a MES; all such cells are marked with either an asterisk or letter V. Lines split the diagram into parts with exactly one MES in each at the upper right corner. Substrings from the same component always occur together in a chromosome. Cells that correspond to reads are marked with R. Properties of MESs are discussed in Appendix A9. 

Figure 3: Multiplicity-extremal substrings . (A) A table in which every cell corresponds to a substring of a string written on the diagonal. MES are marked with *, nucleotides or V. Non-conductor strings are highlighted in red. Strings that contain core strings as proper infixes are highlighted in green. Core strings are marked with V. Reads are marked with R. The border between two substrings is drawn if they have different numbers of occurrences in chromosome candidates. 

Supregraphs. We aim to use MESs as vertex sequences to construct a new type of assembly graph, but a few adjustments are necessary. First, by Theorem 5, only conductor strings can serve as vertices in a non-redundant graph that perfectly represents a set of chromosome candidates; thus, we restrict vertices to strings that are both MESs and conductors. Second, in a non-redundant graph vertices can not be proper infixes of one another; thus, we ignore conductor MES that contain other conductor MES as proper infixes (an approach opposite to subread removal in overlap graph construction). 

Definition 14. A string s is called a core string for a chromosome-set C if s is a conductor MES, such that no other conductor MES t is a proper infix of s. The set of all core strings will be denoted as Core (C).

11 Core strings (that correspond to vertices of the supregraph) are marked with letter V in Fig. 3A. 

Theorem 11. Let C be a finitely-conducting chromosome-set. Then CPC (AG (C, Core (C))) = C. Each edge in AG (C, Core (C)) is either a prefix or a suffix edges. 

Theorem 11 shows that our choice of vertices resulted in a chromosome candidate preserving assembly graph. From the perspective of traditional genome assembly, the resulting graph may appear unnatural (Fig. 3B), since prefix and suffix edges are disallowed in conventional assembly graphs. This motivates the introduction of a new type of assembly graph: 

Definition 15. A supregraph (Suffix-Prefix Graph) is a non-redundant assembly graph in which every edge is either a suffix or prefix edge. A supregraph G is condensed if all labels of its vertices are MESs with respect to CP C (G).

By theorem 11 for any finitely-conducting chromosome-set C, G = AG (C, Core( C)) is a supregraph. Moreover, by construction, vertices of G are MES with respect to C = CP C (G), showing that G is also a condensed supregraph. Although this is not immediately apparent from the definition, condensed supregraphs are analogous to condensed de Bruijn graphs in that they do not contain unnecessary unbranching paths. The structure and properties of condensed supregraphs are discussed in appendix A10. By theorem 11, AG (C, Core( C)) only has suffix and prefix edges making it a supregraph. By construction all its vertices are MES with respect to C = AG (C, Core( C)), making it a condensed supregraph that perfectly represents the chromosome-set C. The next theorem shows that it is the smallest such supregraph. 

Theorem 12. For a finitely-conducting chromosome-set C AG (C, Core (C)) is the smallest supregraph G (in terms of number of vertices or edges) such that CPC (G) = C.

Note that the constructed supregraph is not the smallest among all non-redundant splitting graphs representing a given chromosome-set. However, the actual smallest such graph has a structure very similar to AG (C, Core( C)) and can be obtained from it via a simple procedure discussed in appendix A10. This completes the first goal of this work: we have shown that a chromosome candidate-preserving representation of a read set as an assembly graph exists and identified its minimal form, which we will denote as SP G (R). Figure 3 illustrates the construction of a supregraph. Vertex labels are chosen among substrings of reads and read chains, represented as cells in the diagram. We focus on MES, corresponding to the top-right corners of each subarea. Non-conductor strings (red) and conductor MES that contain other conductor MES as proper infixes (green) are ignored. The remaining yellow MES (marked by letter V) constitute the core strings, which are ordered along a chromosome candidate; this order is shown as a path in Figure 3A. Paths from all chromosomes are then merged by gluing vertices and edges with matching labels, producing the final supregraph (Figure 3B). 

Transforming any assembly graph into a condensed supregraph. Any non-redundant assembly graph G (Fig.4A) can be transformed into a condensed supregraph with the same set of circuit labels using the following supregraph condensing procedure: first, each edge e from u to v is replaced with a vertex, labeled e, that is connected with u and v through incoming prefix edge and outgoing suffix edge (Fig.4B). Then every edge and vertex sequence is replaced with its MES (Fig.4C). The resulting graph can contain unbranching paths, consisting of vertices, marked with the same label. By collapsing these unbranching paths we obtain a condensed supregraph (Fig.4D), denoted as CSPG( G). We refer to this procedure as supregraph condensing. Note that since any supregraph is a splitting graph, we have shown that any graph can be transformed into a splitting graph without changing its set of chromosome candidates. 

Theorem 13. For any non-redundant assembly graph G, CSPG (G) is a condensed supregraph with the same set of chromosome path candidates: CPC (G) = CPC (CSPG (G)) .

# 6 Multiplicity and multiplexing 

Containment condition. In Sections 4 and 5, we focused on preserving chromosome candidates. While this was achieved, the resulting graph does not directly link occurrences of non-contained read sequences in genome candidates to vertices or edges in genome path candidates. Here, we show how to restore this connection. 12 Theorem 14. For non-redundant assembly graph G, vertex v, and string s, if Label (v) = M ES (s) (with respect to CPC (G)), then for any circuit C in G, the number of occurrences of v in C is the same as the number of occurrences of s in Label (C).

Theorem 14 allows direct translation of containment conditions, but only for reads whose MES extension matches a vertex label. In Fig. 3A, most reads fall in the ”yellow zone,” meaning their MES extensions are vertex labels. No reads fall in the ”red zone,” as all non-contained reads are conductors by Theorem 7. Read AGCGAT falls in the ”green zone” and its MES extension corresponds to the path TACAGCGA -GCGA - GCGAT, showing that occurrences of some reads correspond to paths rather than vertices or edges, similar to de Bruijn graphs. To address this, we adopt the multiplexing approach previously used for repeat resolution in de Bruijn graphs [22, 23]. 

Multiplexing. Consider a junction vertex v in a supregraph G, defined as a vertex with at least two incoming and two outgoing edges. Any path visiting v can enter via any incoming edge and exit via any outgoing edge. Multiplexing v restricts these possibilities by replacing v with a set of vertices, each representing a specific incoming–outgoing edge pairing (see Fig. 4E,G,I and Algorithm 2). As multiplexing can introduce unbranching paths in the graph, we apply CSPG procedure to turn the resulting supregraph into condensed supregraph after each step (see Fig. 4F,H). We, however, assume that multiplexing procedure connected every incoming edge with at least one outgoing and vice versa to avoid creating vertices that are not present in any cycles. 

Algorithm 2: V ertexM ultiplex (G, v, D r )

foreach incoming edge uv in Graph do foreach outgoing edge vw in Graph do if Dr (uv, vw ) then 

add vertex p labeled with Label (uvw ) to Graph ;add prefix edge from up to Graph ;add suffix edge pw to Graph ;

Graph ← CSP G (Graph ); 

return Graph ;

Algorithm 3: Multiplex ∗(G, D = ( Dc, D r )) 

while there exists a vertex v in Graph , such that Dc(v) do 

Graph ← VertexMultiplex (Graph, v, D r ); 

return Graph ;To apply multiplexing iteratively (Algorithm 3) one must define two decision rules: rule of choice Dc

defines whether a vertex should be multiplexed, and rule of restriction Dr , that defines which incoming– outgoing edge pairs should be preserved as new vertices. We will refer to a pair of rules, defining iterative multiplexing as multiplexing decision rule D = ( Dc, D r ). In general, an additional rule that defines the order of vertex processing is required, but we will consider only decision rules such that iterative application of multiplexing yields the same result regardless of the order in which vertices are processed. Different rules produce graphs with different properties, i.e., if the restriction rule always preserves all edge pairings, the set of chromosome path candidates (CPC) remains unchanged; such steps are called free .The following theorem describes the properties of graphs, constructing using multiplexing. 

Theorem 15. Let G∗ be obtained from a supregraph G by multiplexing. Then: 1. G∗ is a condensed supregraph and CPC (G∗) ⊆ CPC (G).2. CPC (G∗) = CPC (G) if and only if every multiplexing step is free. 3. Any condensed supregraph G∗ can be obtained from SPG (CPC (G∗)) (minimal supregraph with the same set of chromosome candidates) by a sequence of free multiplexing steps. 

In other words, the minimal supregraph SPG( C) with a given chromosome candidate set C serves as a canonical starting point: any condensed supregraph with the same set of chromosome path candidates can be derived from it via free multiplexing. In contrast, non-free multiplexing strictly reduces the space of chromosome candidates. 13 Figure 4: Multiplexing . The figure illustrates a theoretical genome assembly pipeline, including repre-sention a read set in the form of supregraph and its further simplification, yielding an optimal assembly. Yellow/red/green vertices in subfigures D-K represent core vertices, non-conductor vertices and conductor MES that contain other conductor MES as proper infixes, respectively. (A) Condensed de Bruijn graph, constructed from read set R. (A-D) supregraph condensing procedure. (D-H) Construction of SPG( R)using multiplexing approach. (I) SPG ∗(R): result of additional free multiplexing, that ensures that all MES extensions of non-contained reads are among supregraph vertices. (I-K) OptimalAssembly algorithm: (J) 

Result of graph cleaning assuming that all non-contained reads are present in the genome exactly once. (K) 

Result of supregraph cleaning and compressing. (L) Final assembly assuming that the genome is known to consist of a single cyclic chromosome. 14 Using multiplexing to construct SP G (R). The definition of SP G (R) is not constructive as it requires processing of an infinite set CC( R). Instead SP G (R) can be constructed from the condensed de Bruijn graph DBG (R, k ) using multiplexing. To do it we first apply supregraph condensing to DBG (R, k ) (fig. 4A–C), turning de Bruijn graph into a condensed supregraph CSP G (DBG (R, k )), which we denote as 

SP G 0(R) with the same set of chromosome candidates. Combining theorems 4 and 13 we have CC( R) ⊆

CPC(DBG( R, k )) = CP C (SP G 0(R)). Thus to transform SP G 0(R) into SP G (R) we must first prohibit some extra chromosome path candidates SP G 0(R) might have. Multiplexing procedure helps with it, since multiplexing steps can reduce the set of chromosome path candidates. Here we use multiplexing with the following decision rule DSP G : multiplex only non-conductor vertices; combine incoming edge e1 and outgoing edge e2 into a new vertex only if combinled label of e1 and e2 is present as a substring in a read chain (in other words it is a substring of CC( R)). 

Theorem 16. Multiplexing with decision rule DSP G always stops in a finite number of steps and regardless of operation order Multiplex ∗(SP G 0(R), D SP G ) = SP G (R).

Figures 4D-G illustrate the application of this algorithm. In Fig. 4D, ACA and CGA are non-conducting; testing all edge-pair combinations yields the new vertices shown in Fig. 4E. Condensing(Fig. 4F) leaves one remaining non-conducting vertex, resolved in Fig. 4G. Final condensing (Fig. 4H) completes the construction of SP G (R). 

Using free multiplexing to construct a genome candidate preserving graph. We get back to the problem of perfectly translating the containment condition into vertex multiplicity condition. By theorem 14, it is sufficient to construct a chromosome candidate-preserving graph that contains M ES (r) as a vertex sequence for every non-contained read r from R. By theorem 15 all chromosome candidate preserving graphs can be constructed from SP G (R) using a series of free multiplexing steps. The following multiplexing decision rule DRprovides us with a graph that can perfectly represent containment condition in the graph form: we apply multiplexing to a vertex only if it is labeled with a proper infix of a read from R, all multiplexing steps are free. 

Theorem 17. Multiplexing with the decision rule DR always stops in a finite number of steps and regardless of the operation order the result is the same condensed supregraph SP G ∗(R) = Multiplex ∗(SP G (R), D R).

SP G ∗(R) contains vertex with label M ES (r) for every non-contained read r from R.

In Fig. 4E, GCGA is such a vertex (a substring of AGCGAT), and multiplexing it (Fig. 4I) yields the final graph SP G ∗(R). Theorem 17 concludes the central result of this paper. String graph is expected to perfectly translate chain and containment conditions, but fails to do it because of contained read removal. SP G ∗(R) fulfills these expectations as it perfectly represents chromosome candidates as circuits and enforces containment exactly: a genome path contains a vertex labeled M ES (r) if and only if the genome candidate contains read 

r as a substring, providing a perfect graph translation of both chain and containment conditions. 

Multiplicity. While we have provided a perfect translation for the containment condition, complete repre-sentation of a genome assembly problem in the graph form requires translation of any set string multiplicity conditions ( M) into vertex multiplicity conditions ( N). Let S be a set of strings with multiplicity constraints defined by function M. If graph SPG( R) contains vertices labeled M ES (s) for every s ∈ S, then the perfect translation of multiplicity condition can be obtained the same way as for containment condition: for each string s ∈ S there is a vertex that always has the same number of occurrences in genome path candidate as 

s has in its label. In particular, if S consists only of non-contained read sequences, we can always perfectly translate the multiplicity condition into the graph form. This allows us to extend the main result by taking multiplicity and topology conditions into account: given a read set, multiplicity constraints on non-contained reads M, and topology conditions T we have constructed a supregraph SP G ∗(R) and a set of vertex multiplicity constraints N that provide a genome candidate-preserving representation of genome assembly problem instance. 

Multiplexing in practice. While multiplexing provides constructive definitions for SP G (R) and SP G ∗(R), its practical application requires addressing additional challenges. First, construction of SP G (R) requires quick query answers of two types: whether a given string is a conductor and whether a given string is a substring of a read chain. We leave these questions of efficient data structures beyond the scope of this paper. Second, the number of multiplexing steps in these procedures is difficult to estimate since it applies to each MES string that has length at least k and is a substring of one of the reads. 15 We introduced the multiplexing procedure to address a theoretical question, but this approach is also very powerful in practice. Multiplexing allows us to selectively ignore specific repeats while preserving all other matches. For example, de Bruijn graphs are often criticized for merging identical k-mers that occur in the middle of reads even when the reads themselves do not overlap (e.g., reads with sequences ARB and CRD). Multiplexing the vertex corresponding to such a match (R) produces a graph in which this spurious middle-repeat match is ignored, while all other structure is retained. Exhaustive free multiplexing within a tangled region of the graph can generate all possible paths through this region and enable verification of their viability using additional data. Finally, even a small number of multiplexing steps applied to graphs constructed from real sequencing reads may expose errors in the form of simple graph structures (bulges or tips), thereby facilitating error correction. These observations suggest several promising directions for future development of multiplexing-based genome assembly algorithms. 

Multiplexing and supregraphs. In [22], the multiplexing procedure was used to transform DBG (R, k )into DBG (R, k + 1). Iterative application of this procedure enabled a smooth transition from smaller to larger values of k, avoiding the artificial gaps that are often introduced when de Bruijn graphs are constructed independently for successive values of k. [28, 29]. However, in [22] it was shown that the resulting graph does not always support all required operations and that certain vertices must be “frozen.” This limitation stems from the prohibition of prefix and suffix edges, which makes de Bruijn graphs insufficiently expressive to smoothly represent all possible sequence configurations. To illustrate this point, consider a read set Rk consisting of all possible k-mers. The minimal representa-tion of this read set is the graph DBG k, whose vertices are all 4 k−1 (k − 1)-mers and whose edges are all 4 k

k-mers. The containment condition can then be expressed as: every edge must appear at least once along the genome path. Now suppose we add a single read of length k+1 to obtain a new read set R′

> k

. How does the assembly graph change? If prefix and suffix edges were allowed, the modification would require only a single multiplexing operation. In contrast, when such edges are prohibited, the graph DBG k+1 (with all k-mers as vertices and all ( k +1)-mers as edges) becomes the minimal non-redundant splitting graph capable of representing R′ 

> k

(see appendix A11). Adding just a single read leads to a change in the entire graph, transforming DBG( Rk, k −1) into DBG( Rk, k ). Thus, beyond the natural choice of vertex labels, a supergraph structure is essential for multiplexing. 

# 7 Optimal genome assembly 

We conclude with an example of a solution to the optimal genome assembly problem in a simplified set-ting. We assume that no topology constraints are imposed, and that multiplicity conditions apply only to non-contained reads, with each allowed multiplicity being an interval of integers. Algorithm 4 describes a procedure that, given a read set R and a set of multiplicity constraints M, identifies all longest strings that appear in at least one genome candidate and contain at least one unique read (that is, a read whose multiplicity is constrained by M to be exactly 1) as a substring. 16 Algorithm 4: OptimalAssembly( R|M)

G ← SP G ∗(R); 

N ← vertex multiplicity conditions induced by M;

N ← a network on graph G with (upper and lower) vertex capacities in N defined by N;

foreach t ∈ V (G) ∪ E(G) do if t does not belong to any feasible circulation in N then 

remove t from G;

G ← CSPG( G); 

Assembly ← ∅;

foreach r ∈ R do if M(r) = {1} then 

Add shortest vertex containing read (M ES (r)) to Assembly ;

return Assembly ;Algorithm 4 removes all vertices and edges that cannot occur in any genome consistent with the specified multiplicity constraints. The remaining graph is then condensed to collapse maximal unbranching paths. The following theorem shows that this natural supregraph cleaning procedure is sufficient to recover all optimal contigs that contain at least one unique read as a vertex sequence. 

Theorem 18. For any read set R and a set of multiplicity conditions M defined on non-contained reads: 

OptimalAssembly (R|M) = Superstrings (OA (GC (R|M)) , R1),

where R1 denotes the set of unique reads from R.

Figure 4J illustrates the effect of removing all vertices not belonging to any circulation, under the as-sumption that every non-contained read appears exactly once. The remaining condensed graph (Fig. 4K) consists of two loops. Sequences of these loops make up the optimal genome assembly. If an additional topological constraint, requiring the genome to form a single cyclic chromosome, is imposed, the complete genome assembly can be obtained by combining these two loops into a single cycle (Fig. 4L). 

# Discussion 

The theoretical framework developed in this paper clarifies the structure of the genome assembly problem and provides a foundation for designing and analyzing practical algorithms. Classical assembly approaches often rely on operations, such as discarding contained reads or resolving repeats, that are justified mainly by intuition or empirical experience. By contrast, the framework of chromosome and genome candidates, supregraphs, and multiplexing specifies exactly which representations preserve information and why. As a result, the entire process becomes more transparent: the representation of the read set, the meaning of every vertex and edge, and the effect of each graph modification step can all be traced directly to well-defined mathematical conditions. This increased transparency is especially important for multiplexing, which in practice is used as a heuris-tic repeat-resolution technique. The theoretical formulation shows that multiplexing can be a correctness-governed tool whose effect on the space of genome candidates is well characterized. This not only explains why multiplexing-based strategies succeed in assemblers such as LJA and Verkko, but also provides a framework for evaluating, comparing, and improving the decision rules used in practice. A mathematically grounded representation makes it possible to understand which ambiguities or errors are inherent to the data and which arise from algorithmic choices. At the same time, several challenges remain before the theory can be translated into practical tools. The ability of our approach to partially reconstruct optimal assembly (which was proven to be an NP-hard problem [30]) is explained by the fact that in some cases the supregraph, representing a given set of reads, is exponential in size. Construction of supregraphs requires nontrivial operations, such as deter-mining which substrings represent core MES and verifying whether candidate labels occur in read chains. Moreover, the framework assumes error-free reads, while practical applications require error-correction pro-17 cedures integrated with graph construction. Addressing these issues and developing efficient data structures for representing and updating supregraphs is beyond the scope of this paper and will be discussed elsewhere. 

# Acknowledgements 

The author is grateful to Sergey Nurk, Pavel Pevzner, and Yana Safonova for many helpful discussions that contributed to this work. 

# References 

[1] Aaron M Wenger, Paul Peluso, William J Rowell, Pi-Chuan Chang, Richard J Hall, Gregory T Con-cepcion, Jana Ebler, Arkarachai Fungtammasan, Alexey Kolesnikov, Nathan D Olson, et al. Accurate circular consensus long-read sequencing improves variant detection and assembly of a human genome. 

Nature Biotechnology , 37(10):1155–1162, 2019. [2] Jordi Silvestre-Ryan and Ian Holmes. Pair consensus decoding improves accuracy of neural network basecallers for nanopore sequencing. Genome biology , 22(1):1–13, 2021. [3] Sergey Nurk, Sergey Koren, Arang Rhie, Mikko Rautiainen, Andrey V Bzikadze, Alla Mikheenko, Mitchell R Vollger, Nicolas Altemose, Lev Uralsky, Ariel Gershman, et al. The complete sequence of a human genome. Science , 376(6588):44–53, 2022. [4] Wen-Wei Liao, Mobin Asri, Jana Ebler, Daniel Doerr, Marina Haukness, Glenn Hickey, Shuangjia Lu, Julian K Lucas, Jean Monlong, Haley J Abel, et al. A draft human pangenome reference. Nature ,617(7960):312–324, 2023. [5] Dahyun Yoo, Arang Rhie, Prashanth Hebbar, et al. Complete sequencing of ape genomes. Nature ,641:401–418, 2025. [6] Yilei Zhu, Camila Watson, Yana Safonova, Matthew Pennell, and Anton Bankevich. Closeread: a tool for assessing assembly errors in immunoglobulin loci applied to vertebrate long-read genome assemblies. 

Genome Biology , 26(1):131, 2025. [7] John D Kececioglu and Eugene W Myers. Combinatorial algorithms for dna sequence assembly. Algo-rithmica , 13(1):7–51, 1995. [8] Eugene W Myers. Toward simplifying and accurately formulating fragment assembly. Journal of Com-putational Biology , 2(2):275–290, 1995. [9] Paul Medvedev, Katerina Georgiou, Gene Myers, and Michael Brudno. Computability of models for se-quence assembly. In International Workshop on Algorithms in Bioinformatics , pages 289–301. Springer, 2007. [10] Ilan Shomorony, Seung H Kim, Thomas A Courtade, and David N Tse. Information-optimal genome assembly via sparse read-overlap graphs. Bioinformatics , 32(17):i494–i502, 2016. [11] Alexandru I Tomescu and Paul Medvedev. Safe and complete contig assembly through omnitigs. Journal of Computational Biology , 24(6):590–602, 2017. [12] A Rahman and P Medvedev. Assembler artifacts include misassembly because of unsafe unitigs and underassembly because of bidirected graphs. Genome Research , 32(9):1746–1753, 2022. [13] Pavel A Pevzner, Haixu Tang, and Michael S Waterman. An eulerian path approach to dna fragment assembly. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 98(17):9748–9753, 2001. [14] Eugene W Myers. The fragment assembly string graph. Bioinformatics , 21(suppl 2):ii79–ii85, 2005. 18 [15] Chengxi Ye, Zhanshan Sam Ma, Charles H Cannon, Mihai Pop, and Douglas W Yu. Exploiting sparse-ness in de novo genome assembly. BMC Bioinformatics , 13(6):1–11, 2012. [16] Mikhail Kolmogorov, Jeffrey Yuan, Yu Lin, and Pavel A Pevzner. Assembly of long error-prone reads using repeat graphs. Nature Biotechnology , 37(5):540–546, 2019. [17] Heng Li and Richard Durbin. Genome assembly in the telomere-to-telomere era. Nature Reviews Genetics , 25(9):658–670, 2024. [18] Jonathan Hui, Ilan Shomorony, Kannan Ramchandran, and Thomas A Courtade. Overlap-based genome assembly from variable-length reads. In 2016 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT) , pages 1018–1022. IEEE, 2016. [19] Chirag Jain. Coverage-preserving sparsification of overlap graphs for long-read assembly. Bioinformatics ,39(3):btad124, 2023. [20] Siddharth S Kamath, Mridul Bindra, Debajyoti Pal, and Chirag Jain. Telomere-to-telomere assembly by preserving contained reads. Genome Research , 34(11):1908–1918, 2024. [21] Haoyu Cheng, Gregory T Concepcion, Xiaowen Feng, Haowen Zhang, and Heng Li. Haplotype-resolved de novo assembly using phased assembly graphs with hifiasm. Nature Methods , 18(2):170–175, 2021. [22] Anton Bankevich, Andrey V Bzikadze, Mikhail Kolmogorov, Dmitry Antipov, and Pavel A Pevzner. Multiplex de bruijn graphs enable genome assembly from long, high-fidelity reads. Nature Biotechnology ,40(7):1075–1081, 2022. [23] Mikko Rautiainen, Sergey Nurk, Brian P Walenz, Glennis A Logsdon, David Porubsky, Arang Rhie, Evan E Eichler, Adam M Phillippy, and Sergey Koren. Telomere-to-telomere assembly of diploid chro-mosomes with verkko. Nature Biotechnology , 41(10):1474–1482, 2023. [24] Robert McNaughton and Seymour A. Papert. Counter-Free Automata . MIT Research Monograph. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1971. [25] Kangho Kim, Robert McNaughton, and Brigitte McCloskey. Families of locally testable languages. 

Theoretical Computer Science , 234(1–2):47–75, 2000. [26] Aldo De Luca and Antonio Restivo. A characterization of strictly locally testable languages and its application to subsemigroups of a free semigroup. Information and Control , 44(3):300–319, 1980. [27] Stefan Kurtz, Adam Phillippy, Arthur L Delcher, Michael Smoot, Martin Shumway, Corina Antonescu, and Steven L Salzberg. Versatile and open software for comparing large genomes. Genome biology ,5(2):1–9, 2004. [28] Yu Peng, Henry CM Leung, and Francis YL Chin. Idba–a practical iterative de bruijn graph de novo assembler. In Annual international conference on research in computational molecular biology , pages 426–440. Springer, 2010. [29] Anton Bankevich, Sergey Nurk, Dmitry Antipov, Alexey A. Gurevich, Mikhail Dvorkin, Alexander S. Kulikov, Valery M. Lesin, Sergey I. Nikolenko, Son Pham, Andrey D. Prjibelski, Alexey V. Pyshkin, Alexander V. Sirotkin, Nikolay Vyahhi, Glenn Tesler, Max A. Alekseyev, and Pavel A. Pevzner. Spades: A new genome assembly algorithm and its applications to single-cell sequencing. Journal of Computa-tional Biology , 19(5):455–477, 2012. [30] Evgeny Kapun and Fedor Tsarev. De bruijn superwalk with multiplicities problem is np-hard. BMC Bioinformatics , 14(5):1–7, 2013. 19 Appendix 

# Appendix A1. Bidirected strings and graphs 

While we traditionally represent DNA as a sequence of nucleotides, the real physical DNA molecule contains two chains with nucleotide sequences reverse-complementary to each other. Thus the correct way to encode DNA sequence is with an unordered pair of strings s1, s2 where s1 and s2 are reverse-complements to each other. If DNA is encoded this way, so should reads, chromosome/genome candidates, labels of vertices and edges in assembly graphs. This correction leads to a bidirected assembly graph instead of a conventional directed graph. Bidirected graphs are well-studied and one can easily formulate the same notions of walks, circuits, and their labels in bidirected graphs. In this text for simplicity we do not use the language of bidi-rected graphs, but every single formulation and proof here can be directly translated into correct formulation and proof for bidirected graphs. 

# Appendix A2. Challenges of linear chromosome assembly 

The assumption that all chromosomes in the genome form a single circular sequence is particularly conve-nient for graph-based models. Without this assumption, each read could, in principle, originate from an independent chromosome, necessitating additional complex constraints to avoid such “perfect” assemblies. In reality, complex genomes predominantly consist of linear chromosomes. However, the practical dis-tinction between circular and linear chromosomes diminishes as chromosome length increases. Complex repetitive regions are interspersed with simple, easily assembled regions, enabling the decomposition of the assembly problem into smaller subproblems, each representing a local “genome tangle” with multiple en-try points. Conceptually, one can connect all free ends within a subproblem into a single virtual vertex, effectively circularizing each genome fragment involved in the tangle and reducing the assembly problem to the circular chromosome case. This reduction is generally valid, except for subproblems that include actual chromosome termini, which require special treatment and are challenging to model accurately within a graph framework. 

# Appendix A3. Cyclic strings and related notions 

The easiest way to introduce cyclic strings is to consider them as a special case of infinite strings. We say that a string s is a mapping from the index set ( a, b ) of integers strictly between a and b to alphabet Σ, where a, b ∈ Z ∪ {±∞} . Length of the string s is calculated as b − a − 1 and denoted as |s|. A string s

is left or right infinite if a or b is ±∞ respectively. Otherwise, s is called left or right finite. Two strings 

s1 : ( a1, b 1) → Σ and s2 : ( a2, b 2) → Σ are equal if and only if there exists an integer number t, such that 

a1 = t + a2, b1 = t + b2 and s1[i + t] = s2[i] for any integer i from ( a2, b 2). String s : ( a, c ) → Σ is said to be a concatenation of strings s1 : ( a, b ) → Σ and s2 : ( b − 1, c ) → Σ if s[i] = s1[i] for a < i < b and s[i] = s2[i]for b − 1 < i < c . We omit technical proof that concatenation is properly defined for any pair of right-finite and left-finite strings. s1 and s2 are referred to as prefix and suffix of s. String s is a substring of string t if 

t = AsB for some strings A and B. If either A or B are not empty, s is a proper substring of t. If both A

and B are not empty, s is a proper infix of t. A right and left infinite string s : Z → Σ is called cyclic if there exists d, such that for any integer t s [t] = s[t + d]. The smallest such d is referred to as period. For a finite string s we denote ⟨s⟩ as a cyclic string with period |s|, such that ⟨s⟩[t] = s[t (mod |s|)] for any integer t.Note that we use this notation only if |s| is the period of this string. In other words, s cannot be represented as a shorter string, repeated multiple times. These definitions are in agreement with the standard definitions for finite strings. However, the definition of position inside a string should be introduced more carefully than just the distance from the start. 

Definition 16. Position in a string s is a pair of strings (l, r ), such that s = lr and r is not empty. The character at position (l, r ) is the first character of r. Two positions l1r1 and l2r2 in string s are equal iff 

l1 = l2 and r1 = r2.

For finite strings position can be associated with the length of A. Positions in cyclic strings are more tricky: for a cyclic string ⟨s⟩, there are only |s| different left-final suffixes and |s| different right-final prefixes, resulting in |s| different positions. In contrast from finite strings, where positions can be associated with 20 non-negative integer numbers, for cyclic strings positions should be associated with elements of finite group 

Z/|s|Z, or, more precisely, with an |s|-element set, on which Z/|s|Z group acts. Therefore, we can add integer numbers to positions: e.g. for position ( l, cr ) there is the next position ( l, cr ) + 1 = ( lc, r ) (here c is a single letter). 

Definition 17. For strings s and t, we say that t occurs at position p = ( l, r ) in t if p is a position in t and 

s is a prefix of r. We refer to a pair (p, s ) as an occurrence of s in t.

Note that since the number of different positions in a cyclic string is finite, the number of occurrences of any substring in a cyclic string is also finite. 

Definition 18. If s occurs in t at position p = ( A, sB ) and t occurs in w at position q = ( C, tD ), then 

p ◦ q = ( CA, sBD ) is the nested occurrence of s in w.

Note that while we allowed all kinds of infinite strings here, in the graph assembly model we only consider finite and cyclic strings. Next we formalize the notion of consequtive occurrences. This notion is natural for finite strings, but for cyclic strings it requires more technical definition. 

Definition 19. Let (p1, s 1), (p2, s 2), . . . , (pn, s n) be a sequence of occurrences of finite strings in a cyclic string ⟨t⟩. We say that this sequence of occurrences is sorted and its elements are consecutive occurrences 

if there exist non-negative integers 0 = d1 ≤ d2 ≤ · · · ≤ dn < |t| such that pi = p1 + di for all i, for 

i = 1 , . . . n − 1, di + |si| ≤ di+1 + |si+1 |, and dn + |sn| ≤ | t| + |s1|.

In other words in a sorted list of occurrences, both left and right ends of occurrences are sorted. 

Proposition A3.1. For an infix-free string-set S, the set of all their occurrences in a cyclic string ⟨t⟩ can be recorded as a sorted list of occurrences. 

Proof. Let s be one of the strings in S of minimal length that has at least one occurrence in ⟨t⟩, and let (p, s ) be one such occurrence. The set {p, p + 1 , . . . , p + |t| − 1} contains each position of the cyclic string ⟨t⟩

exactly once. Hence, every position can be uniquely written as p + i with 0 ≤ i < |t|. We call i the relative position .We treat ( p, s ) as the first element of the list and sort all remaining occurrences of strings from S

by increasing relative position, breaking ties by increasing substring length. Let the resulting order be (p1, s 1) = ( p, s ), (p2, s 2), . . . , (pn, s n). By construction, the left endpoints in this list are sorted. We will show that this list is sorted by right endpoints too. Assume, in search of contradiction, that for some i we have di + |si| > d i+1 + |si+1 |. We consider two cases. 

Case 1: di = di+1 . Since ties in relative position are resolved by increasing substring length, we have 

|si| < |si+1 |. Therefore, di + |si| = di+1 + |si| ≤ di+1 + |si+1 |, a contradiction. 

Case 2: di < d i+1 . Then di < d i+1 < d i+1 + |si+1 | < d i + |si|, which implies that si+1 is a proper infix of si. This is impossible for strings from S.To show that dn + |sn| ≤ | t| + |s1| we again note that if opposite is true then s1 must be a proper infix of sn. The inequality dn + |sn| ≤ | t| + |s1| is proved analogously, and we conclude that the constructed list is a sorted list of all occurrences of strings from S in ⟨t⟩.

Definition 20. For a proper infix-free set of strings S and a string T we define Occ (S, T ) as a sequence of occurrences of strings from S in T .

# Appendix A4. Cyclic labels in assembly graphs 

Our model allows vertices and edges in the graph to have cyclic labels. In this section we discuss how such vertices and edges should be treated in the assembly graph. Consider a vertex with a cyclic label ⟨s⟩. If it has at least one outgoing edge, this edge must be marked with sequence t, such that ⟨s⟩ is a prefix of t. Infinite string ⟨s⟩ can only be a prefix of itself, thus the edge should also be marked with ⟨s⟩. But what about the end vertex of the edge, marked with a cyclic string? The end vertex must be labeled with a suffix of ⟨s⟩. Since we allow only finite and cyclic strings, the label of the end vertex must be also ⟨s⟩, making this edge a loop. Therefore, while cyclic labels are allowed in assembly graphs, they appear only as isolated loops. Each such loop represents a circuit, thus contributing to the set of chromosome path candidates. 21 Appendix A5. Single long read library assembly and hybrid assembly problems 

Modern challenges in genome assembly require integrating multiple types of data to produce the most contiguous assemblies possible. Assembly graphs effectively represent simple, high-quality long-read libraries but struggle to directly incorporate information from more complex data types, such as Hi-C, genome maps, or error-prone long reads. Nevertheless, a reliable graph built from high-quality reads is widely regarded as the best foundation for genome assembly, effectively reducing the space of possible genomes to a managable space with additional technologies used to close gaps and resolve complex tangles in the graph. Therefore, although this study focuses on the simplest type of input data, it still provides a foundational framework for modern genome assembly applications. 

# Appendix A6. Contig preservation and non-redundant graphs 

In this section, we discuss the properties and alternative formulations of non-redundant assembly graphs. We start by analyzing the clean graph assumption made in section 3 

Proposition A6.1. In a graph in which every vertex and every edge belongs to at least one cycle, each weakly connected component is strongly connected. 

Proof. Let vertices u and v belong to the same weakly connected component. Then there exists a sequence of vertices W starting in u and finishing in v, such that consecutive vertices are connected with an edge in at least one of the directions. We will construct a walk from u to v. For every pair of consecutive vertices w1, w2 in W , if the edge is directed forward, we add it to the walk. If the edge is directed backward we note that this edge must be a part of a cycle and thus there exists a path from w1 to w2, which we can add to the walk. This method allows one to construct directed walks in both directions between any pair of the vertices from the same weakly directed component, thus every weakly connected component is strongly connected. 

Figure 5: Complex graph examples . (A) An example of a redundant graph that is weakly contig-preserving and splitting. (B) The result of a non-redundant graph with the same set of chromosome candi-dates. 

Graph examples. Figure 5 shows examples of complex cases, where contig preservation is disconnected from redundancy. For clarity in this example all edge labels are ommitted, but each of them is either labeled by concatenation of start and end vertex labels or is a prefix/suffix edge (in subfigure 5B). The graph in subfigure 5A is redundant since the vertex label TATAT contains the vertex label ATA as a proper infix. On the other hand, this graph is weakly contig preserving. Such situation occurs because graph structure forces a situation where every genome candidate that contains TATAT, must also contain paths CCC-ATA and ATA-CC. As a result, whenever vertex TATAT is in one of the paths from OGA( P) it is impossible for vertex ATA to form a maximal path from OGA( P). Thus even though the same sequence is present multiple times in the assembly graph, it is irrelevant because global graph structure never allows paths from OGA( P) have labels that are substrings of each other. Non-redundant assembly graph in figure 5A can be easily transformed into a non-redundant graph with the same set of chromosome candidates by a single free multiplexing step at vertex ATA (Fig. 5B). The downside of this transformation is that the already weak contig preservation becomes even weaker: consider the set of two genome candidates ⟨GGGCCCAT A ⟩ and ⟨GGCCAT A ⟩. In the graph in Fig. 5A these genome candidates are represented by the cycles GGG-CCC-ATA and GG-CC-ATA. The optimal contigs for this 22 set of genome candidates are CC, GG, and ATA. However, only vertex ATA is present in every genome candidate path. The optimal contigs CC and GG are therefore not preserved in the resulting assembly. Resolving vertex ATA leads to the loss of ATA as well. 

Non-redundant graph properties. The definition of non-redundant assembly graphs is technical and non-intuitive. In simple words its intention is to prevent the same sequence from occurring as a label in multiple places in the graph. However, accurate formulation requires more precise wording. Additional complication is introduced by the presence of prefix and suffix edges. To clarify the meaning of non-redundancy, we provide the following implications of the second condition for the case of a traditional assembly graphs. 

Proposition A6.2. Let G be a non-redundant assembly graph without suffix and prefix edges. Then: 1. For any two walks P and Q in G, Label (P ) is a prefix/suffix/substring/equal of Label (Q) iff P is a prefix walk/suffix walk/subwalk/equal of Q.2. For any vertex or edge v and walk P in G, the number of occurrences of v in P is the same as the number of occurrences of Label (v) in Label (P ).

Proof: (1) If Label (P ) is a proper infix of Label (Q), then by non-redundancy of G, P is a subwalk of 

Q.If Label (P ) is a proper suffix of Label (Q), consider a walk Q′ obtained from Q by appending one additional edge e to its end (such an edge exists because every vertex lies on a cycle and therefore has at least one outgoing edge). Then Label (Q) is a proper prefix of Label (Q′), and consequently Label (P ) is a proper infix of Label (Q′). By definition, P is an inner subwalk of Q′. Since Q′ differs from Q only by the addition of the final edge, it follows that P is a subwalk of Q.The cases where Label (P ) is a proper prefix of Label (Q) or Label (P ) = Label (Q) are handled analogously. 

(2) We only prove this statement for vertex v. The proof for edges is analogous. First we note that considering a walk Q that consists only of vertex v in the definition of a non-redundant graph gives us the following conclusion: for any walk P that does not contain vertex v as an inner vertex, 

Label (P ) does not contain Label (v) as a proper infix. We can split walk P into subwalks by breaking P at each occurrence of v. Each subwalk does not contain v as an inner vertex, thus its label does not contain v

as a proper infix. Therefore v can only appear as a prefix or suffix of subwalks. From item 1 we know that it can be a prefix/suffix only if corresponding subwalk starts/finishes in v. Thus the number of occurrences of v in Label (P ) is the same as the number of occurrences of vertex v in P .We can extend intuition from proposition A6.2 to graphs that contain suffix and prefix edges, but it requires the introduction of special types of walks in the graph. 

Definition 21. A walk is called open if it consists of a single vertex or the first/last edge in the walk is not prefix/not suffix. 

Definition 22. A walk is called closed if the first/last vertices have a non-prefix incoming edge/a non-suffix outgoing edge. 

Note that in a graph with suffix and prefix edges, adding suffix edge at the end or prefix edge to the start of a walk does not change the label of the walk. Open and closed walks represent the shortest/longest walks with a given label. The proposition below lists the properties of veritices in a non-redundant graph, as well as open and closed walks. 

Proposition A6.3. Let G be a non-redundant assembly graph. 1. If a vertex in G has an outgoing suffix/incoming prefix edge, it can have no other outgoing/incoming edges. 2. If a vertex v in G is a proper prefix/suffix of vertex u, then there exists unique path from v to u/from 

u to v that consists only of prefix/suffix edges. 3. All vertices in a non-redundant graph have different labels. 4. Vertex label can not be a proper infix of another vertex label. 

23 5. For any walk P in G there exists unique closed walk Pc and unqiue open walk Po such that Label (P ) = 

Label (Po) = Label (Pc). Po can be obtained from Pc by removing all prefix/suffix edges from the start/end of Pc.

Proof: (1) Assume that a vertex v has both a suffix and a non-suffix outgoing edge, denoted s = vw and 

n = vu , respectively. The label of the path consisting solely of edge n contains Label (w) as a proper infix, yet does not contain w as an internal subpath. This contradicts non-redundancy, since in a non-redundant graph every occurrence of Label (w) must correspond to w as a subpath. The remaining cases are proved analogously. 

(2) Consider a vertex v that is a suffix of a vertex u. By item (1), every vertex has at most one outgoing suffix edge. Hence, there exists a unique path P starting at u that consists solely of suffix edges and terminates either upon reaching v or when no outgoing suffix edge is available. In the former case, P is the desired path. Suppose instead that P terminates before reaching v. Let e be any edge outgoing from the terminal vertex of P , and consider the walk P ′ = P e . The edge e cannot be a suffix edge; therefore, Label (v) is a proper infix of Label (P ′). By non-redundancy of the graph, this implies that v must occur as a subwalk of 

P , a contradiction. The remaining cases are proved analogously. 

(3) In search of contradiction we assume that there exist vertices u and v, that have the same label. From item 2 we can conclude that there exists a path from u to v, such that every edge in it is a suffix edge. Since eveery consecutive vertex in this path must be shorter than the previous and the path contains at least one edge, length of v must be smaller than length of u, a contradiction. 

(4) If we apply the definition of non-redundant graphs to a pair of paths, each consisting of a single vertex, we note that one of them can not be an inner subpath of another. Thus vertex label can not be a proper infix of a label of another vertex. 

(5) Consider initial walk P . If we iteratively add suffix edges to the end of P , its label won’t change. This process can not continue indefinitely since at each step the size of the last vertex reduces. The last vertex of the resulting walk does not have outgoing suffix edges, therefore it must have outgoing non-suffix edge. Similarly adding prefix edges to the front of P will result in a walk that starts from a vertex that has an incoming non-prefix edge. This walk is by definition closed and by construction has the same label as the initial walk P . Similarly removing suffix edges from the end of P and prefix edges from the start of P will result in an open walk with the same label. We are now ready to prove the properties of non-redundant graphs that are satisfied even in presence of suffix and prefix edges. 

Proposition A6.4. Let G be a non-redundant assembly graph. Then: 1. For any two closed walks P and Q in G, such that Label (P ) is a substring/prefix/suffix of Label (Q),

P is a subwalk/prefix walk/suffix walk/equal of Q.2. For a closed walk P , any walk Q, such that Label (Q) is a substring of Label (P ) must be a subwalk of 

P .3. For any two open walks P and Q in G, where P is non-trivial (contains at least one edge), Label (P )

is a prefix/suffix/substring of Label (Q) iff P is a prefix walk/suffix walk/subwalk of Q.4. For any two open walks P and Q in G, Label (P ) = Label (Q) iff P = Q.5. For any vertex or edge v and closed walk P in G, the number of occurrences of v in P is the same as the number of occurrences of Label (v) in Label (P ).6. Let C be a simple circuit and d be the total length of its edges minus total length of all vertices. Then 

d is the period of Label (C).

Proof: (1) We will prove this statement only for substrings since the other cases can be proven anal-ogously. Consider the extension Q′ of the walk Q obtained by adding one edge at the beginning and one at the end. Since Q is closed, this extends the label of Q at both ends. Therefore, Label (Q), as well as 

Label (P ), are proper infixes of Label (Q′). Since the graph is non-redundant, it follows that P is an inner subwalk of Q′. Moreover, since Q′ differs from Q by just one edge on each side, P is in fact a subwalk of Q.24 (2) Consider a closed walk Qc that has the same label as Q. Q is subwalk of Qc by item (5) of proposition A6.3. Qc is a subwalk of P by item 1 in this proposition. Therefore Q is a subwalk of P .

(3) Again, we prove this statement only for substrings. Consider closed walks P ′ and Q′ with the same labels as P and Q, respectively. By item (1), P ′ is a subwalk of Q′, and hence P is also a subwalk of Q′.Since P is non-trivial, it must start in a non-prefix edge and end in a non-suffix edge. Therefore, removing all prefix edges from the start and all suffix edges from the end of Q′—which transforms Q′ back into Q—cannot remove any edges of P . Consequently, P is a subwalk of Q.

(4) The statement for closed walks follows directly from item (1). For open walks, item (3) addresses the case where at least one of the walks is nontrivial. If both walks are trivial (i.e., consist of a single vertex), the claim follows from the fact that, in a non-redundant graph, all vertices have distinct labels. 

(5) This proof follows the strategy of item (2) in Proposition A6.2, but additional care is required at the endpoints of the walk. First, suppose that the vertex v does not occur in the walk P . By item (2), v cannot appear as a substring of Label (P ). Hence the statement holds in this case and we can now assume that v occurs at least once in 

P .We decompose P into subwalks P = P1P2 · · · Pn, by splitting it at each occurrence of v in P . If P starts and/or ends with v, we, respectively, consider P1 and/or Pn to be a walk consisting of a single vertex v.By construction, consecutive subwalks intersect exactly at v. Consequently, the labels of the consequtive subwalks overlap by v. This establishes a bijection between occurrences of v in P and overlaps between consecutive subwalk labels. It remains to show that these are the only occurrences of v in Label (P ). Each Label (Pi) has length at least |v|, and the overlap between consecutive labels is exactly v. Therefore, any occurrence of v in Label (P ) must lie entirely within a single Label (Pi) or span the overlap between two consecutive labels. The latter case corresponds precisely to an occurrence already accounted for. Thus it suffices to rule out additional occurrences inside a single subwalk label. By construction, v cannot appear as a proper infix of Label (Pi), since this would imply that v occurs as an internal vertex of Pi, contradicting the definition of the decomposition. The only remaining possibilities are that v occurs as a prefix or suffix of Label (Pi). For interior subwalks (i.e., 1 < i < n ), the prefix and suffix occurrences coincide with the overlaps already considered. Moreover, subwalks that start and end in v must contain at least one non-suffix edge (otherwise size of the last vertex would be smaller than the size of the first vertex in the walk). Therefore the size of the labels of interior subwalks are strictly larger than |v|, making suffix occurrence of v in the subwalk different from prefix occurrence of v in the same subwalk. Hence we only need to analyze the boundary cases: prefix of P1 and suffix of Pn.Consider P1, which is a prefix walk of P that ends at v. Suppose that Label (P1) has v as a prefix. We claim that this forces Label (P1) = v. Indeed, assume instead that Label (P1)̸ = v. In this case |Label (P1)| > |v|,making prefix occurrence of v in Label (P1) different from suffix occurrence of v in Label (P1). Since P is closed, there exists an incoming edge e to the starting vertex of P1 that is not part of P1. Extending P1

by e at the beginning produces a walk Q whose label contains v as a proper infix. This implies that v

occurs as an inner vertex of Q, which is impossible since v can only occur once in P1 by construction. Hence 

Label (P1) = v, and the prefix occurrence of v in Label (v) is already accounted for by the overlap between 

Label (P1) and Label (P2). The case of Pn is symmetric: if v is a suffix of Label (Pn), then the whole Label (Pn) must coincide with 

v, resulting in all occurrences of v in Label (P ) being accounted for as overlaps of consequitive subwalks. 

(6) By construction of chain label, Label (C)[ i] = Label (C)[ i + d] for any integer i. We need to show that there can be no smaller d′ that satisfies the same condition. Let d′ be the period of Label (C). By item (5) all occurrences of vertex and edge labels in Label (C) match occurrences of corresponding verteces and edges in C. These occurrences of vertex and edge labels in Label (C) must be periodic with period d′. If we collect edge and vertex label occurrences starting within one period of the Label (C), we obtain a cycle C′,that represents the same periodic sequence of vertices and edges as C. Total length of edges minus total length of vertices in C′ is d′. C is a simple cycle, thus C′ can only be longer than C. Therefore d′ ≥ d.This proposition allows us to prove the main property of non-redundant graphs, formulated as theorem 1 in section 3. 

Theorem 1. In a non-redundant graph, for any circuit C and vertex v, the number of occurrences of v in 

C equals the number of occurrences of Label (v) in Label (C).

25 Proof . We follow the logic of the proof of item 5 of proposition A6.4, but border cases are not of concern in this theorem. First, consider that C does not contain vertex v. In such case we can consider walk P , that consists of 

|v| + 1 complete passes through C, starting from an arbitrary vertex of C. Label (P ) contains all substrings of Label (C) of length |v| as proper infixes. P does not contain vertex v, thus Label (P ) does not contain v

as a proper infix. Therefore, Label (C) also does not contain v.Let P1, P 2, . . . , P n be the result of splitting cycle C at every occurrence of v in C. Label of each subwalk has length larger than |v| and overlaps between consecutive subwalks are exactly v. v cannot occur as a proper infix of any of the subwalks since v can not be an inner vertex for any of the subwalks. Thus all occurrences of v in Label (C) correspond to overlaps between consecutive subwalks, which in turn correspond to occurrences of v in C.

Proposition A6.5. Let P be a walk and C be a circuit in a non-redundant assembly graph. Then, whenever 

Label (P ) is substring of Label (C), P is a subwalk of C.

Proof . Let v be one of the shortest vertices in C. Incoming and outgoing edges for v in C can not be prefix of suffix edges respectively. Thus the result Q of cutting C in one of the occurrences of v is a closed walk. If Label (P ) is a substring of Label (C), then Label (P ) must also be a substring of label of walk Q′,constructed as walk Q repeated a certain amount of times. Therefore P is a subwalk of walk Q′, which in turn is a subwalk of C.Below we prove he remaining statements from section 3. 

Proposition A6.6. De Bruijn graphs and Condensed de Bruijn graphs are non-redundant when constructed from a read set that covers all k + 1 -mers in a circular genome. 

Proof . If the label of walk P is a proper infix of the label of walk Q, then the sequence of k-mers in 

Label (P ) is a subsequence of the sequence of k-mers in Label (Q) that does not contain the first and the last 

k-mer. Since k-mers from reads bijectively map to vertices of de Bruijn graph, walk P is an inner subwalk of walk Q.

Theorem 2. Every weakly contig-preserving assembly graph is splitting. Every splitting, non-redundant graph is weakly contig-preserving. 

Proof . First, we assume that an assembly graph G is weakly contig-preserving. Let vertex v from G have two distinct outgoing edges e1 and e2. Since every edge is contained within at least one cycle, we consider the shortest cycles C1 and C2, containing e1 and e2 respectively. Note that both C1 and C2 contain v only once since otherwise there exists a shorter cycle that contains e1 or e2. Finally, we consider the set of genome candidates that consists of two genome candidates: P = {{ C1}, {C2}} . Let P be the longest walk containing vertex v present in all genome candidates from P. P must end in v since v is followed by different edges in different genome candidates. Since G is weakly contig-preserving, Label (P ) must be a maximal string that is a substring of all genome candidates. Assume that e1 and e2 have a common prefix s, that is longer than 

v. In this case any label of a genome candidate contains not just Label (P ), but also a combined sequence of Label (P ) and s. This combined sequence contains Label (P ) as a proper substring, which contradicts the maximality of Label (P ). Therefore e1 and e2 must diverge immediately after v and G is splitting. Let us assume now that the graph G is splitting and non-redundant. Consider a walk P that is one of the maximal walks, present in every genome path candidate from P. Label (P ) is naturally present as a substring of every genome path candidate label, but let’s assume that it is not maximal such string. In particular, there exists a string s, that contains Label (P ) as a proper substring that is also present in every label of genome path candidate. Without loss of generality we will assume that Label (P ) is a proper prefix of s. Consider a chromosome C of a genome path candidate from P, such that s is a substring of Label (C). Every occurrence of s in Label (C) is also an occurrence of its prefix Label (P ) in Label (C), which in turn corresponds to an occurrence of P in C as a subwalk. Consider the next edge e after P in the occurrence of P in C that matches the occurrence of s in Label (C). Note that edge e will be the same for any genome candidate we consider, since e is an edge outgoing from the last vertex v of P and the first nucleotide in 

Label (e) after v is defined by s. Therefore walk P +e is present in every genome candidate, which contradicts the maximality of P . Therefore for non-redundant splitting graphs, labels of all walks from OGA (P) are maximal contigs, that are present in every genome path label. .26 Theorem 3. For any non-redundant splitting assembly graph G and a set of genome path candidates P,Labels (OGA (P)) = Superstrings (OA (Labels (P)) , V (G)) .

.

Proof . By theorem 2 we know that Labels(OGA( P)) ⊂ OA(Labels( P)). Every walk label from Labels(OGA( P)) contains at least one vertex label as a substring, thus we can conclude Labels(OGA( P)) ⊂ Superstrings(OA(Labels( P)) , V (G)) .

Consider s ∈ Superstrings(OA(Labels( P)) , V (G)), that is a maximal contig present in every label of genome path candidate, that also contains at least one vertex as a substring. Consider the longest walk P , such that 

Label (P ) is a substring of s. Such walk exists since s at least contains a label of one vertex as a substring. Since Label (P ) is present in every label of genome path candidate as a substring, walk P must be present in every genome path candidate as a subwalk. We thus have the same situation as in the proof of theorem 2: if Label (P )̸ = s, we can extend P to find a longer walk P ′ = P + e that is present in every genome path candidate. If Label (P ′) is still a substring of s, we have a contradiction with maximality of P . If Label (P ′)is not a substring of s, we can combine s and Label (P ′) to construct a longer string s′ that is present in every genome path candidate label as a substring, which contradicts the maximality of s. Therefore Label (P ) = s

and P is a maximal walk that is present in every genome path candidate as a subwalk. 

# Appendix A7. Chromosome candidate preservation and conductor strings. 

We start by proving theorem 4 from section 4. 

Theorem 4. For read set R CPC (OG (R)) = CPC (SG (R)) ⊆ CPC (ROG (R)) = CC (R) ⊆ CPC (DBG (R, k )) .Moreover, each of these inclusions is strict for some read sets. 

Proof . Raw overlap graph features a bijection between reads and vertices. Its edges represent overlaps. Thus there is a bijection between cyclic read chains and circuits in raw overlap graphs, constructed from these reads. This bijection preserves labels, thus the set of read chain labels is the same as the set of cycle labels in ROG (R). Overlap graph is the result of removing some vertices and edges from ROG (R). Thus the set of circuits in OG (R) is a subset of the set of circuits in ROG (R). Since circuit-to-chain mapping still preserves labels, we have CPC(SG( R)) ⊆ CPC(ROG( R)). String graph is obtained from Overlap graph by removing transitive edges. Transitive edges do not change the set of circuit labels since for any circuit that contains transitive edges, one can construct a circuit that does not contain them and has the same label. Therefore CPC(OG( R)) = CPC(SG( R)). Finally any read k-chain label can be represented as a sequence of k and k + 1-mers, each coming from one of the reads. Thus de Bruijin graph constructed from these reads will contain a walk with the same label as any label of a read k-chain. therefore CC( R) ⊆ CPC(DBG( R, k )). Examples of cases where inclusions are strict can be found in fogure 1. 

Properties of conductor strings. The definition of conductor strings uses self-overlapping strings that start and finish with conductor string s. Many proofs would be easier if it was possible to record such strings as sxs for some string x. Unfortunately it is not always possible since a self-overlapping strings can be shorter than double length of s. For example, string ATATA both starts and finishes with ATA, but can not be represented as ATAxATA. That is why when we describe self-overlapping string t we introduce two strings x and x′, such that t = sx = x′s. The following lemma shows an important connection between x

and x′.

Lemma A7.1. For any finite strings x, x ′, if there exists string s, such that sx = x′s then ⟨x⟩ = ⟨x′⟩

Proof . We will prove that a represents a cyclic shift of b by |s| positions. Indeed, comparing letters at position n in sa and bs we conclude that for |s| ≤ n ≤ | a|, letter at position n − | s| in a is the same as the letter at position n in b. For positions n < |s| the letter at position n in s matches letter at position n in 

b, which in turn (by comparison of letters at positions |a| + n in sa and bs ) matches the letter at position 

n + |a| − | s| in a.The next lemma helps us characterize substrings of cyclic strings. 

Lemma A7.2. If a finite string s is a substring of a cyclic string ⟨t⟩, then there exists string w, such that 

⟨t⟩ = ⟨sw ⟩

27 Proof . Since s is a finite substring of a string obtained as infinite repetition of string t, s must be a substring of a finite repretition tn of string t. In other words xsy = tn. ⟨t⟩ = ⟨tn⟩ = ⟨xsy ⟩ = ⟨syx ⟩, thus the statement of the lemma is satisfied for w = yx .In the following we prove important properties of conductor strings and use them to prove the remaining theorems from section 4. 

Lemma A7.3. Let s be a conductor string with respect to a chromosome-set C. Then for any pair a1sb 1, a 2sb 2

of superstrings of s, that are substrings of C, the results of the suffix switch a1sb 2 and a2sb 1 are also substrings of C.

Proof . Let w1 = ⟨a1sb 1t1⟩ = ⟨sb 1t1a1⟩ and w2 = ⟨a2sb 2t2⟩ = ⟨sb 2t2a2⟩ be members of C that contain 

a1sb 1 and a2sb 2 as substrings respectively (by Lemma A7.2. Since s is conductor, we can apply definition of conductor strings to s and strings sbt 1as and sdt 2cs that have s as both prefix and suffix and conclude that ⟨b1t1a1sb 2t2a2s⟩ = ⟨b2t2a2sb 1t1a1s⟩ also belong to C. Therefore a1sb 2 and a2sb 1 are also substrings of 

C.

Lemma A7.4. Let s be a conductor string with respect to chromosome-set C and sa = a′s be a substring of 

C that starts and finishes with s. Then ⟨a⟩ ∈ C.

Proof . Let ⟨w⟩ be a cyclic string from C that contains sa as a substring. Then by lemma A7.2 ⟨w⟩ =

⟨sat ⟩ = ⟨ats ⟩. Consider strings sa and sts , that have s as both prefix and suffix. Since s is a conductor string and ⟨ats ⟩ ∈ C, we conclude that ⟨a⟩, ⟨st ⟩ ∈ C.

Theorem 5. For any non-redundant assembly graph G, the following strings are conductors for C =

CPC (G): (i) any superstring of a conductor; (ii) any vertex, edge, or walk label in G; (iii) any string that is not a substring of C; (iv) any string that is at least as long as the longest edge label in G.

Proof . (i) Assume that s is a conductor string and consider its superstring t = xsy . Consider an arbitrary pair of strings ta = xsya , tb = xsyb that start and end with t. Since t ends with y we can also rewrite these as ta = xsya = xsa ′y, tb = xsyb = xsb ′y for a′, b ′ such that ya = a′y and yb = b′y. Since 

yab = a′yb = a′b′y, we have ⟨ab ⟩ = ⟨a′b′⟩ by lemma A7.1. Therefore ⟨ab ⟩ ∈ C iff ⟨a′b′⟩ ∈ C. Since both 

ta = xsa ′y and tb = xsb ′y finish with t = xst , we have sa ′ and sb ′ both start and finish with s. We apply the definition of conductor string to s to obtain ⟨a′b′⟩ ∈ C iff ⟨a′⟩, ⟨b′⟩ ∈ C. From ya = a′y and yb = b′y,we have ⟨a⟩ = ⟨a′⟩ and ⟨b⟩ = ⟨b′⟩ by lemma A7.1. Therefore ⟨a′⟩, ⟨b′⟩ ∈ C iff ⟨a⟩, ⟨b⟩ ∈ C. Combining all observations, we conclude that ⟨ab ⟩ ∈ C iff ⟨a⟩, ⟨b⟩ ∈ C. Thus t (arbitrary superstring of a conductor string 

s) is a conductor string. 

(ii) We will prove the statement only for vertex labels, since walk and edge labels are superstrings of vertex labels. Consider a vertex v and strings va and vb , that both start and end with v. Assume that 

⟨a⟩, ⟨b⟩ ∈ C. Thus there exist cycles C1, C 2, such that Label (C1) = ⟨a⟩ and Label (C2) = ⟨b⟩. Since all occurrences of a vertex v in a cycle correspond to occurrences of v in its label we can find occurrences of v

that correspond to the start and end of substring va in the Label (C1) and vb in Label (C2) in Label (C). The walks P1 and P2, defined as subwalks of C1 and C2 between these pairs of occurrences of v have labels sa 

and sb correspondingly. Since P1 and P2 both start and end in v we can combine them into a single cycle C

that goes through P1 first and through P2 after that. Label (C) = ⟨ab ⟩. Therefore ⟨ab ⟩ ∈ CPC( G) = C. The opposite implication from the conductor string definition is proven analogously. 

(iii) If a string v is not a substring of C, then no superstring of v can belong to C. Therefore the bidirectional in the definition of conductor strings is always correct as both left side ⟨ab ⟩ ∈ C and the right side ⟨a⟩, ⟨b⟩ ∈ C are always false. Note that similarly one can show that cyclic strings are conductors since cyclic strings have no super-strings. 

(iv) Consider a string s that is at least as long as the longest edge label in G. If s is not a substring of 

C, it is a conductor based on item (iii). If s is a substring of C, it must be a substring of a cycle lablel, which is a combined sequence of a sequence of edges. It can not be strictly contained within a single edge label, thus it must contain at least one vertex label as a substring. Since every vertex label is a conductor and all superstrings of conductors are also conductors s is also a conductor. 

Theorem 6. If there exists K, such that any string of length K is a conductor with respect to chromosome-set C, then CPC (DBG (C, K )) = C.

Proof . By theorem 4 CC( C) ⊆ CPC( DBG (C, K )). Since cyclic strings can form only trivial chains consisting of a single cyclic sequence, CC( C) = C . Therefore C ⊆ CPC( DBG (C, K )) and it is sufficient to 28 show that CPC( DBG (C, K )) ⊆ C. We will use induction to show that any walk label in CPC( DBG (C, K )) is a substring of C. Any path of length 1 is a substring of C since it corresponds to a k + 1-mer in C. Let 

P and Q be two walks that end and start in vertex v respectively. By induction assumption Label (P ) and 

Label (Q) are substrings of C. Since v is a conductor, by lemma A7.3, Label (P Q ) is also a substring of C.This shows that the label of any walk is a substring of C. Consider a circuit C and a vertex v in it. If we cut circuit C in vertex v, the resulting walk P starts and ends in a vertex v and its label is a substring of C,that starts and ends with a conductor string v. By lemma A7.4 we can conclude that Label (C) belongs to 

C for any circuit C, which concludes the proof. The following lemma provide the necessary tools to apply the criterion to the set of chain labels. 

Lemma A7.5. Let P be a read chain and s a prefix of Label (P ). Let r be a non-contained read, such that 

r is a suffix of s. Then there exists a read chain Q, that ends with read r, coinsides with P before the last read and Label (Q) = s.

Proof . Without loss of generality we consider only the case Consider the longest prefix chain P ′ of P ,such that |Label (P ′)| ≤ | s| − | r|. Let the next read after prefix chain P ′ in P be w. Combined sequence of 

P ′ and w has length larger than |s| − | r| and is a prefix of s. Thus w has overlap with r, such the label of a chain Q, that consists of P ′, w, and r is s. Chain Q thus satisfies the required conditions. Note that the same argument can be applied in a reverse situation where s is a suffix of Label (P ), that starts with the sequence of read r.

Theorem 7. If R is a read set with maximal read length L, then every string of length 2L and every non-contained read is a conductor with respect to C = CC (R).

Proof . Any string s that has length at least 2 L must be either not present as substring in any chain (in which case it is a conductor by theorem 5 item iii) or contains a non-contained read as a substring. Since superstrings of conductors are conductors themselves, it is sufficient to prove the theorem for non-contained reads. Let r be a non-contained read. Consider strings ra 1 = b1r, ra 2 = b2r, that start and finish with r.Assume ⟨a1⟩, ⟨b1⟩ ∈ C. Then there exist read chains C1 and C2, such that Label (C1) = ⟨a1⟩ = ⟨b1⟩ and 

Label (C2) = ⟨a2⟩ = ⟨b2⟩. Consider read chains P1 and P2, that represent sufficient amount of repeated units of cyclic chains C1, C2 to contain ra 1 and ra 2 as label substrings respectively. Applying lemma A7.5 twice (once for prefix and once for suffix) we can conclude that there exist chains Q1, Q 2 that start and end with 

r and have labels ra 1 and ra 2 respectively. We can combine these two chains into a single larger chain with label ⟨a1a2⟩. Thus ⟨a1a2⟩ ∈ C. The reverse implication (if ⟨a1a2⟩ ∈ C, then ⟨a1⟩, ⟨a2⟩ ∈ C can be proven analogously. 

# Appendix A8. Universal assembly graph construction 

Theorem 8. 1. For any non-redundant assembly graph G, we have AG (CPC (G), V (G)) = G.2. For any infix-free string-set v and chromosome-set C AG (C, V ) is a non-redundant graph. 3. Let C be a cyclic string-set, and let V be a proper infix-free set of strings such that every string in C contains at least one element of V as a substring. Then C ⊆ CPC (AG (C, V )) , and for any other non-redundant assembly graph G satisfying C ⊆ CPC (G) and V (AG (C, V )) ⊆ V (G), we have 

C ⊆ CPC (AG (C, V )) ⊆ CPC (G).

Proof: (1) In non-redundant assembly graphs the number of occurrences of vertex labels in a cycle label matches the number of occurrences of the vertex in the cycle. Thus a mapping that transforms vertices in the cycle into positions where they occur in the label is an order-preserving byjection. Therefore the cycle extracted from Label (C) for a circuit C using algorithm AG matches C. Since every vertex and edge in assembly graph is covered by at least one cycle, gluing all cycles in the graph G through matching edge and vertex sequences results in complete graph G.

(2) Consider a closed walk P in graph AG (C, V ). We will show that the sequence of vertices in P matches the sequence of occurrences of strings from V in Label (P ). More precisely, we will prove that for any prefix 

s of string Label (P ) that ends with vertex v ∈ V , there exists a prefix walk Q of P , that ends with v and 

Label (Q) = s. Consider the shortest prefix walk Q1 of P , such that |Label (Q1)| ≥ | s| (it exists because 

Label (P ) > |s|). Consider the last edge e from u to w in the walk Q1 and walk Q0 that is the result of removing e from Q1. Assume that v is not a substring of e. Then |Label (Q1)| − | e| = |Label (Q0)| − | u| >

29 |s| − | v|. On the other hand |Label (Q0)| < |s|, which means that vertex v contains vertex u (last vertex in 

Q0) as a proper infix, which is impossible since they are both from proper infix free set V . Therefore v is a substring of e.

v can not be a proper infix of e, since otherwise the sequence of v will occur between u and w in the chromosome e was extracted from. For the same reason v can be neither a prefix of e larger than u nor a suffix of e that is larger than w. Thus v is either a prefix of u or a suffix of w. The first case is impossible since it would mean that |Label (Q0)| ≥ | s|. Therefore the only remaining case to consider is that v is a suffix of w.Consider all proper suffixes w1, w 2, . . . , w n of w that are present in V and are longer than v. Any chromosome sequence c that contains w also contains v as well as w1, w 2, . . . , w n. When vertex occurrences in c are transformed into a sequence, w is always followed by n + 1 vertices, connected to w by suffix edges from w to w1, from w1 to w2, etc., until it reaches v with edge from wn to v. Each of these edges is the only outgoing edge for its start, thus walk P has no choice but to follow this path after prefix walk Q. Also none of these edges can be the end of walk P , since P is a closed walk. Therefore walk P contains all of these edges. Adding these n + 1 edges to prefix walk Q of P results in a prefix walk of P that has label s (adding suffix edges to the end of the walk does not change its label) and ends with vertex v.From this we infer that every occurrence of a vertex label in a closed walk P matches an occurrence of a vertex at corresponding position. To complete the proof of non-redundancy of graph AG (C, V ) we consider a walk walk Q such that Label (Q) a proper infix of Label (P ) for a walk P . Let Pc and Qc be closed walks that have the same labels as P and Q correspondingly. The seqeuence of occurrences of vertex labels in 

Label (Q), that corresponds to actual vertices of Qc is also present in Pc since Label (Qc) is a substring of 

Label (Pc). Therefore (from the property proven above), Qc is a subwalk of Pc, whose label is a proper infix of Label (Pc). P differs from Pc by adding a few prefix edges to the start and suffix edges to the back. Removing these edges would not change that Qc and thus Q is a inner substring of P . Thus for any pair of walks P, Q , such that Label (Q) is a proper infix of Label (P ), we conclude that Q is inner subwalk of P ,showing that AG (C, V ) is non-redundant. 

(3) Construction of AG (C, V ) involves transformation of each chromosome candidate ⟨s⟩ from C into a circuit C, where vertices correspond to occurrences of strings from V in ⟨s⟩ and edges are extracted to connect consecutive vertices. The label of C is ⟨s⟩. After all vertices and edges with matching sequences are glued together, circuit C maps to a circuit C′in AG (C, V ), with a mapping that preserves edge and vertex sequences. Thus it also preserves the label of C and Label (C′) ∈ CPC( AG (C, V )) for any C from C, and therefore C ⊆ CPC( AG (C, V )). Next we consider a non-redundant assembly graph G such that C ⊆ CPC( G) and V (AG (C, V )) ⊆ V (G). We will prove that for any edge e from u to v in AG (C, V ), graph G has a walk P from u to v, such that Label (e) = Label (P ). By construction of AG (C, V ), e is present in one of the cycles derived from chromosomes. We denote the chromosome, from which the cycle containing e is derived as C. Since C ⊆

CPC( G), there exists a circuit C′ with the same label as C. Since V (AG (C, V )) ⊆ V (G), each vertex in 

C matches an occurrence of a vertex with the same label in C′. In particular, we consider occurrences of vertices u and v, that flank the occurrence of e in C. The label of the walk segment (in graph G) between these occurrences matches the label of e (in graph AG (C, V )). Therefore every edge e in AG (C, V ertices )corresponds to a walk in graph G, connecting vertices with the same labels and itself having the same label as e. Thus every cycle in AG (C, V ) can be translated into a cycle in graph G by replacing each edge with a walk having the same label. This transformation preserves the label of the cycle. Therefore CPC( AG (C, V )) ⊆ CPC( G). 

# Appendix A9. Multiplicity-extremal substrings 

Theorem 9. A finite string s is MES for a chromosome-set C if and only if there exist characters c1̸ = c2

and c3̸ = c4, such that c1s, c2s, sc 3, and sc 4 are substrings of C.

Proof . Let s be a MES for a chromosome-set C and sc 3 be one of its occurrences in C. Since s is MES, not every occurrence of s in C is followed by c3. Therefore there exists an occurrence of s, followed by a different character ( c4). Thus there exist c3 and c4, such that sc 3 and sc 4 are both substrings of C. Proof for existence of c1 and c2 is analogous. Let now s be a string such that c1s, c2s, sc 3, and sc 4 are substrings of C. Let’s consider an extension sc 

30 of s by one nucleotide. Without loss of generality we can assume that c̸ = c3. Since sc 3 is a substring of C,it is impossible that every occurrence of s extends to an occurrence of sc . Similarly we can prove that left extensions have less occurrences than s in C as well, which means that s is MES. 

Lemma A9.1. If a string s has MEM between two strings r1, r 2 (common substring, that can not be extended to a larger match), then s is also MES with respect to the string-set {r1, r 2}.

Proof . Consider MEM between strings r1 and r2 that has sequence s. Since it is MEM, it can not be extended to a longer match. Therefore, any extention of s will lose at least one of the two occurrences, constituting MEM. Therefore s is a MES with respect to the string-set {r1, r 2}.

Lemma A9.2. Any cyclic string from C is MES with respect to C.

Proof . Since cyclic strings have no extensions, any extension of a cyclic string has less occurrences in 

C. .

Lemma A9.3. MEM between two MESs with respect to a string-set C is also MES. 

Proof . Let a1sb 1, a 2sb 2 the two MESs in question and s represent the sequence of the MEM. Since s is a match between these two strings that can not be extended further, then .

Theorem 10. For any substring s of a chromosome-set C, there exists a unique MES, denoted M ES (s)

( MES extension of s), such that s occurs exactly once in M ES (s) as a substring and every occurrence of s

in C extends to an occurrence of M ES (s).

Proof . Consider an occurrence ( p1, s ) of a string s in a chromosome c1. An occurrence ( q1, m 1) of a minimal MES m1 in the same chromosome c1, that covers occurrence ( p, s ). In other words there is a position r1 in m1, such that ( q1, m 1) ◦ (r1, s ) = ( p1, s ). Similarly we consider an occurrence ( p2, s ) of s in a chromosome c2 and minimal MES m2 that covers this occurrence of s in c2: ( q2, m 2) ◦ (r2, s ) = ( p2, s ). s

is a match between m1 and m2. It can be extended to a MEM with string s′: for position t of s in s′ and positions r′

> 1

, r ′ 

> 2

of s′ in m1 and m2, we have ( t, s ) ◦ (r′

> 1

, s ′) = ( r1, s ) and ( t, s ) ◦ (r′

> 2

, s ′) = ( r2, s ). If either r′ 

> 1

or r′ 

> 2

is a start position in m1 or m2, then there is a MES that starts with s′, which means (by theorem 9) that there exist c1, c 2, such that c1s and c2s are substrings of C. Similarly if both r′ 

> 1

are r′

> 2

start positions in m1 or m2, the letters preceding positions r′ 

> 1

and r′ 

> 2

in m1 and m2 must be different since since s′ is constructed as the longest extension of a match s between m1 and m2. Therefore if we set c1 and 

c2 to be the letters in positions r1 − 1 and r2 − 1 of m1 and m2 correspondingly, we again have c1s and 

c2s are substrings of C. Similarly, by considering the end of match s′ between m1 and m2, we can find c3

and c4, such that sc 3 and sc 4 are substrings of C. By theorem 9 we conclude that s′ is a MES, that covers the considered occurrences of s in c1 and c2. Since m1 and m2 are minimal such MES, m1 = s′ = m2 and 

r1 = r2 = t. Thus any occurrence of s in chromosomes can be extended to an occurrence of a MES and the same chromosome. If we assume that s occurs at least twice in M ES (s) at positions r1 and r2 we can use the same argument to conclude that r1 = r2 and reach a contradiction. 

Lemma A9.4. Whenever s is a substring of t, the string M ES (s) is a substring of M ES (t). Furthermore, if s is a conductor as well as MES, Whenever s is a prefix/suffix of t, the string M ES (s) is a prefix/suffix of M ES (t).

Proof . Since M ES (t) contains t as a substring, it also contains s as a substring and thus by theorem 10, 

M ES (s) is a substring of M ES (t). Let m = M ES (s) and M ES (t) = amb B. We will show that in case s is a conductor string mb is a MES. By theorem 9, applied to m, there are c1, c 2 such that c1m and c2m are substrings of C. By lemma A7.3, applied to conductor string s and substrings of C mb , c1m, c2m, we conclude that c1mb and c2mb are also substrings of C. By theorem 9, applied to string amb , there are c3 and c4, such that ambc 3 and ambc 4 are substrings of C, and in particular mbc 3 and mbc 4 are substrings of C as well. Therefore by theorem 9, applied to mb , we conclude that mb is a MES. In case s is a prefix of t, mb contains t as a substring. Thus a is empty and m is a prefix of M ES (t). The case when s is a suffix of t can be proven the same way. 

# Appendix A10. Supregraphs 

Note that supregraphs can not have parallel edges. Therefore we will sometimes denote edges in supregraphs by a pair of its start and end vertices. 31 Lemma A10.1. If string s has a prefix and suffix that are conductor MES, then s is also a conductor MES. 

Proof . As a superstring of a conductor, string s is automatically conductor. To show that it is MES, we apply theorem 9 to its conductor MES prefix a and suffix b to find letters c1̸ = c2 and c3̸ = c4, such that 

c1a, c2a, bc 3, bc 4 are substrings of C. We then apply lemma A7.3 to conductors a and b and chromosome substrings c1a, s , c2a, bc 3, bc 4, paired with s to conclude that c1S, c2S, S c3, S c4 are substrings of C, which my theorem 9 implies that s is a MES. 

Theorem 11. Let C be a finitely-conducting chromosome-set. Then CPC (AG (C, Core (C))) = C. Each edge in AG (C, Core (C)) is either a prefix or a suffix edge. 

Proof . Consider consecutive occurrences of core sequences a, b in a chromosome candidate and an edge sequence e that connects them. We will show that e is also a core sequence. By lemma A10.1 e is a conductor MES. Any conductor MES, representing a proper infix of e, would have an occurrence between a and b in the chromosome candidate, which is impossible since a and b are consecutive core sequence occurrences. Therefore e is a conductor MES that does not contain other conductor MES as proper infixes. In this case 

e should have also been marked as a core sequence occurrence between a and b, unless sequence of e equals either a or b, which means that every edge e in the graph is either a prefix or a suffix edge. Let G = AG (C, Core( C)). By item 3 of theorem 8 we have C ⊆ CPC( G), so we only need to prove the opposite inclusion. We start by proving by induction that label of every walk P in G is a substring of C. The base case is for a walk, consisting of a single vertex. Every vertex is a core string, and thus is a substring of C. Note since every edge is either prefix or suffix, edge labels are also substrings of C. Consider a walk 

P and edge e that extends it. Both Label (P ) and e are substrings of C. The last vertex is P is a conductor that is also a prefix of e. Thus by lemma A7.3, applied to Label (P ) and e we infer that the extension of P

with e also has a label that is a substring of C.Consider an arbitrary circuit C in G. Let v be an arbitrary vertex in C and P be a walk, resulting from breaking C in vertex v. Label (P ) is a substring of C that starts and ends with conductor string v. Thus by lemma A7.4 we can conclude that Label (C)C. Therefore CPC( G) ⊆ C). The following proposition provides properties of condensed supregraphs and explains why it is called condensed. 

Proposition A10.2. Let G be a condensed supregraph and v its vertex. 1. Either v has at least two outgoing prefix edges and no outgoing suffix edges or exactly one outgoing suffix edge and no outgoing prefix edges. 2. Either v has at least two incoming suffix edges and no incoming prefix edges or exactly one incoming prefix edge and no incoming suffix edges. 3. v is unbranching (both indegree and outdegree equal to 1 if only if it has a maximal label by substring inclusion among all vertex labels. Its incoming and outgoing edges are prefix and suffix respectively. We refer to such vertices as outer vertices. 4. v has more than one incoming and outgoing vertices if only if it has a minimal label by substring inclusion among all vertex labels. Its incoming and outgoing edges are suffix and prefix respectively. We refer to such vertices as junction vertices. 

Proof: (1) : We have already shown that condensed supregraphs are non-redundant, thus they can not have simultaneously outgoing prefix and suffix edges (see proposition A6.3). And any vertex can only have one outgoing suffix edge. It remains to prove that v can not have exactly one outgoing prefix edge and no other outgoing edges. Consider a cycle C, such that v is a substring of Label (C). since the graph is non-redundant, C must contain vertex v at corresponding position. Since v has only one outgoing edge e, C

must contain e after this occurrence of v. Therefore, whenever v is present in Label (C), it can be extended to the occurrence of e in Label (C). This contradicts the assumption that v is MES. 

(2) The claim is symmetric to (1) and can be proven analogously. 

(3) If no other vertex is a superstring of v, it can not have outgoing prefix or incoming suffix edges. Therefore by items (1) and (2) it must have exactly one incoming prefix edge and exactly one outgoing suffix edge. On the other hand, if a vertex has indegree and outdegree 1, then it must have outgoing suffix ( uv )and incoming prefix ( vw ) edges by items (1) and (2). Assume that v is not a maximal substring vertex. Then the larger vertex must contain either u or w as a proper infix, which is impossible in a non-redundant graph. 32 (4) Opposite to item (3), vertex v that has minimal label can only have outgoing prefix and incoming suffix edges. By items (1) and (2) there must be more than one such incoming and outgoing edges. On the other hand, if v has outgoing prefix ( vw ) and incoming suffix ( uv ) edges, but is not a minimal vertex, then the vertex with label contained within v must be a proper infix of either u or w, which again is impossible in a non-redundant graph. Item (3) in proposition A10.2 shows that some of the vertices can be unbranching in condensed supre-graph. However it is also evident from the proposition that two unbranching vertices can not be adjacent in the graph: only the maximal my substring inclusion vertices can be unbranching in condensed supregraph and such vertices are only connected with vertices that are their substrings, which can not therefore be unbranching. Thus, similarly to condensed de Bruijn graph, in condensed supregraph, unbranching vertices are merged together where possible. Items (4) and (5) provide a classification of vertices in a condensed supregraph into junction, outer and all the remaining, which we will refer to as forks . Every fork vertex has branching on one side (incoming or outgoing) and one incident edge on another side. Branching side always extends the sequence of fork vertex (prefix edges if outgoing, suffix edges if incoming), while the edge on the other side leads to a labeled with a prefix or suffix of the fork vertex. Any walk in a condensed supregraph can be viewed as a sequence of alternating junction and outer vertices, with fork vertices in between. 

Theorem 12. For a finitely-conducting chromosome-set C AG (C, Core (C)) is the smallest supregraph G (in terms of number of vertices or edges) such that CPC (G) = C.

Proof . The proof is based on a stronger fact proven in theorem 17 item 3. Since we do not rely on the current theorem in the proof of AG (C, Core( C)), it does not create a loop in the inference. Theorem 17 item 3 states that any graph G∗ can be obtained from SPG(CPC( G∗)) using a sequence of free multiplexing operations. In other words. any graph G∗, such that CPC( G∗) = C can be obtained from G = SPG( C) = 

AG (C, Core( C)) using free multiplexing steps. Free multipexing only increases the number of vertices and edges in the graph. Condensing procedure, performed after each step in multiplexing process does not change the graph because free multiplexing never introduces unubranching paths in the graph. Since G∗ can be obtained from G by modifications that increase the number of vertices and edges, G is the minimal graph, such that CPC( G) = C.

Theorem 13. For any non-redundant assembly graph G, CSPG (G) is a condensed supregraph with the same set of chromosome path candidates: CPC (G) = CPC (CSPG (G)) .

Proof . We need to prove the following statements: First we note that each operation in supregraph condensing procedure directly preserved the set of chromosome path candidates since labels of all circuits remained the same. Thus CPC( G) = CPC(CSPG( G)). To show that the resulting graph is supregraph we note that replacing edges with outer vertices ensures that every edge is either a prefixx or a suffix edge. The replacement of sequences with their MES extensions does not change that by lemma A9.4. Collapsing trivial paths also does not change that. Thus in CSPG( G)every edge is either a prefix or a suffix edge. Finally, to show that the resulting graph is non-redundant Consider a cicruit C in CSPG( G). For every vertex v from G, its occurrences in Label (C) match occurrences of M ES (v) in Label (C) by definition of MES. On the other hand by construction every vertex in G can be (surjectively) mapped to a vertex in CSPG( G), in such a way that every vertex occurrence is embedded into its MES occurrence. Thus the occurrences of MES extensions of every vertex match the occurrences of vertices in CSPG( G), showing that the graph is non-redundant. Note that every outer vertex v has exactly one incoming ( uv ) and one outgoing ( vw ) edge. Thus it can be replaced with an edge uw , marked with the same sequence as v. This modification does not change the set of chromosome path candidates and it preserves non-redundancy. On the other hand this graph is smaller than SPG( C). To truly find the minimal graph with a given set of chromosome path candidates one should apply this procedure to all outer edges in the graph. 

Proposition A10.3. Consider a finitely-conducting chromosome-set C and a graph G, constructed by re-placing every outer vertex in graph SPG (C) with an edge. Then G is the smallest non-redundant graph in terms of the number of edges), such that CPC (G) = C.

Proof . Consider an arbitrary non-redundant graph G and apply the supregraph condensing procedure to it. When transforming every edge into a new vertex, the number of vertices and edges in the graph increases 33 by the initial number of edges. However the last procedure that collapses trivial paths removes some of the edges. We will show that the actual increase in the number of vertices and edges equals the amount of outer edges in the graph CSPG( G). Consider an edge e from u to v in graph G and assume that vertex u

has outdegree 1. Since G is non-redundant, every occurrence of u in SPG( G) = C must be an occurrence of vertex u in a corresponding cycle. Every occurrence of u in a cycle must continue with e since e is the only outgoing edge for u. Therefore e is a substring of M ES (v) and thus M ES (e) = M ES (u). Similarly if indegree of v is 1, we can conclude that M ES (e) = M ES (v). Thus if either outdegree of u or indegree of v is 1, after transforming every edge into vertex and then replacing vertex sequences with their MES extensions, a vertex, corresponding to edge e will be adjacent to a vertex with exactly the same sequence and a trivial edge, connecting them. Such trivial edges are collapsed as the final step, reducing the number of vertices and edges in the graph by 1. Thus in the end, the transformation of an edge into vertex adds extra vertex and edge to the final graph only if edge start has outdegree at least 2 and edge end has indegree at least 2, which corresponds to outer edges in CSP G (G). CPC( CSP G (G)) = C and it is a condensed supregraph. Thus it can be obtained from SPG( C) using only free multiplexing steps. Let E∗(G) be the number of edges in the graph minus the number of outer vertices in the graph. This value can only increase after free multiplexing operations, thus E∗(CSPG( G)) ≤

E∗(SPG( C)). On the other hand we have shown that |E(G)| ≥ E∗(CSPG( G)). Thus for any graph G, such that CPC( G) = C, we have |E(G)| ≥ E∗(SPG( C)). On the other hand replacing all outer vertices with edges in SPG( C) results in a graph with exactly E∗(SPG( C)) edges. Thus this graph has the minimal amount of edges among all graphs with a given set of chromosome path candidates. 

# Appendix A11. Mutiplexing 

Theorem 14. For non-redundant assembly graph G, vertex v, and string s, if Label (v) = M ES (s) (with respect to CPC (G)), then for any circuit C in G, the number of occurrences of v in C is the same as the number of occurrences of s in Label (C).

Proof . Let C be a circuit in G. By theorem 10, occurrences of s in any chromosome candidate match with occurrences of M ES (s) in it. Since the graph is non-redundant, occurrences of v = M ES (s) in Label (C)match the occurrences of vertex v in circuit C. Thus, the number of occurrences of s in Label (C) is the same as the number of occurrences of v in C.

Theorem 15. Let G∗ be obtained from a supregraph G by multiplexing. Then: 1. G∗ is a condensed supregraph and CPC (G∗) ⊆ CPC (G).2. CPC (G∗) = CPC (G) if and only if every multiplexing step is free. 3. Any condensed supregraph G∗ can be obtained from SPG (CPC (G∗)) (minimal supregraph with the same set of chromosome candidates) by a sequence of free multiplexing steps. 

Proof: (1) Assume that G∗ was obtained from G in a single multiplexing step, but without the supre-graph condensing procedure. Assume that the multiplexing was applied at vertex v and resulted in a set of new vertices U . Consider a cycle C in graph G∗. C may pass through new vertices. Consider a sequence of vertices in C. If we replace each occurrence of of a vertex from U with vertex v. The resulting sequence of vertices represents a cycle in graph G that has the same label as C. Therefore label of any circuit in G∗ is aalso label of a circuit in G. By theorem 13 supregraph compression does not change the set of circuit labels. Applying this observation to every step in the multiplexing process we conclude that CPC( G∗) ⊆ CPC( G)regardless of the number of multiplexing steps it took to obtain G∗ from G.

(2) Again assume that G∗ was obtained from G in a single multiplexing step, but without the supregraph condensing procedure. First, consider the case that the multiplexing step was free and every pair of incoming and outgoing edges of vertex v became a new vertex in G∗. Any circuit in graph G can be transformed into a circuit in G∗ by replacing all occurrences of v with one of the new vertices, chosen based on the edges before and after v in the cycle. Since supregraph condensing also does not change the set of circuit labels, free multiplexing does not change it too. Assume now that the multiplexing step was not free and there is a pair of edges uv, vw that are not represented in G∗ as a new vertex. Consider also a graph Gf , that is the result of free multiplexing of graph G in vertex v. In Gf a combined sequence of vertices u and w is present in at least one cycle Cf .This cycle must contain the new vertex v′, representing the combined sequence of u and w. Assume that 34 CPC( G∗) = CPC( G) = CPC( Gf ). In such case Label (C) must be a label of a cycle in G∗. This cycle 

C∗ can not contain v′, since v′ was not added to G∗ during multiplexing step. Since G∗ is a subgraph of 

Gf , C∗ is also a cycle in Gf . Thus two different cycles in Gf have the same label, which is impossible in a non-redundant graph, a contradiction. Therefore the set of chromosome path candidates only remains unchanged after free multiplexing steps. Before we proceed to item (3) we will prove the following lemmas. 

Lemma A11.1. Let G be a compressed supregraph. Consider vertex u that has outgoing prefix edges. G

contains edge uv iff Label (v) is a minimal by substring inclusion MES with respect to CPC (G) that contains 

u as a proper prefix. 

Proof . Assume s is a MES, that contains u as a proper prefix, but itself is a proper prefix of Label (v) = 

Label (uv ). From theorem 9 there exists letter c such that sc is a substring of CPC( G), but not a prefix of 

v. Consider cycle C, such that Label (C) that contains sc . Since G is non-redundant, C must contain vertex 

v at the start of occurrence of sc in Label (C). It must be followed by edge uv since the first letter after u

in v is the same as in s and G is splitting. But sc is not a prefix of v, a contradiction. Thus every outgoing edge from u is a minimal MES, that contains u as a proper prefix. To prove the inverse statement consider a minimal MES s that contains u as a proper prefix. There must be a cycle C in the graph, such that s is a substring of Label (C). This substring occurrence must include occurrence of u. The next edge after u in the cycle must be a prefix edge uv . v is a MES, that contains u

as a proper infix. Thus s is a prefix of v. On the other hand v is also a minimal MES, that contains u as a prefix. Therefore s = v.

Lemma A11.2. Consider the following relation on supregraphs: for assembly graphs G1, G2 we say that 

G1 ≤ G2 if every vertex in G2 is a superstring of a vertex in G1. When restricted to the set of all condensed supregraphs with a given set of chromosome candidates C, this relation is a partial order relation. 

Proof . Reflexivity and transitivity of this relation are trivial. We will prove antisymmetry: whenever 

G1 ≤ G2 and G2 ≤ G1, we have G1 = G2.Since G1 and G2 are non-redundant it is sufficient to prove that they have the same set of vertices. Indeed, in such case by item 1 of theorem 8 

G1 = AG(CPC( G1), V (G1)) = AG( C, V (G1)) = V (G1)) = AG(CPC( G2), V (G2)) = G2.

Consider the smallest vertex in the graphs G1 and G that does not have a copy in the other graph. Without loss of generality, assume that it is vertex v1 from graph G1. Since G2 ≤ G1, there is a vertex in 

G2, that is a substring of v. Consider the largest such vertex u2. u2 can not have the same label as v, thus it is shorter than v and must have a copy u1 in G1. By item (4) of proposition A6.3, u1 cannot be a proper infix of v1. Without loss of generality, assume that u1 is a prefix of v1. By item (2) of proposition A6.3 there must be a path from u1 to v1, that consists of only prefix edges. This path cannot contain more than one edge since otherwise there will be a vertex, larger than u2 in G2, that is a substring of v1. Thus, there exists a prefix edge u1v1. Consider minimal MES s, that contains u1 as a proper prefix and is itself a prefix of v1.It exists since v1 itself is MES. By lemma A11.1 both G1 and G2 must contain vertex with label s and there should be an edge from u1/u2 to this vertex. Since edge u1v1 is the only edge in graph G that can have s

as a label, we have v1 = s. But G2 must contain a vertex marked with s too, thus there exists vertex v2 in 

G2 that has the same label as v1.We are now ready to proceed with the proof of item (3) of theorem 15. 

(3) Let C = CPC( G∗) and G = SPG( C). To obtain G∗ from G we will iteratively apply free multiplexing to a smallest vertex in G that is not present in V (G∗). First we will show that such operations retain invariant G ≤ G∗. This property holds for initial G, that is 

AG (C, Core( C)) because Core( C)) contains all conductor MES, that are not proper infixes of the conductor MES. Thus every conductor MES (and thus every vertex of G∗) contains a string from Core( C). Free operation on a junction vertex also does not change the invariant. Indeed, consider a vertex v from graph G that is not present in V (G∗). Consider vertex u in G∗, that contains v as a substring: u = avb .Without loss of generality assume that b is not empty. Let s be the shortest MES substring of u that contains 

v as a proper prefix. It exists since vb is a MES. By lemma A11.1 s is a vertex in G and vs is an edge it. s

will stay in the graph after the free multiplexing procedure since v is the only vertex that is removed. Thus 35 any vertex in G∗ that had a substring vertex in G still has one after multiplexing operation on a junction vertex that is not present in G∗.We still need to show that it is possible to apply multiplexing to the shortest vertex in G, that is not present in G∗, that is to show that such vertex is always a junction. Assume that the smallest such vertex 

v is not junction. Without loss of generality assume that it has incoming prefix edge uv . u is shorter than 

v, thus there is vertex u∗ in G∗. By lemma A11.1 v is a smallest MES that contains u as a proper prefix. Thus vertex with label v must be present in G∗ too, a contradiction. The process stops when V (G) ⊆ V (G∗). Thus G∗ ≤ G. However we have also shown that G ≤ G∗ at any moment in the multiplexing process. Thus by lemma A11.2 G = G∗ in the end of multiplexing process. We previously noted that one can reinterpret reads as sequence of k-mers by replacing the original alphabet with the alphabet of k-mers. However, in the formulation of next theorem implicitly relies on k

when defining SPG 0(R) as CSPG(DBG( R, k )). This choice is made to keep the construction of SPG( R)as close to practical implementations as possible. If we instead work strictly over the k-mer alphabet, the appropriate definition would be SPG 0(R) = CSPG(DBG( R, 1)), where vertices correspond to single letters of the k-mer alphabet and edges correspond to adjacent pairs of such letters. We adopt this interpretation in the proof of the next theorem. 

Theorem 16. Multiplexing with decision rule DSP G always stops in a finite number of steps and regardless of operation order Multiplex ∗(SP G 0(R), D SP G ) = SP G (R).

Proof . Let G be any graph, that can be obtained from SP G 0 through multilexing with the decision rule 

DSP G . We will show that G always retains the following properties: G ≤ SPG( R), CC( R) ⊆ CPC( G), and every edge in G is a substring of CPC( R). First we show that SPG 0(R) = CSPG(DBG( R, k )) satisfies these conditions. Combining theorems 4 and 13 we have CC( R) ⊆ CPC(DBG( R, k )) = CPC( SP G 0(R)). Next we note that every edge label in de Bruijn graph is a substring of CPC( R) by construction. Replacing edge and vertex sequences with their MES extensions during supregraph compressing of the de Bruijn graph does not change this fact since the cyclic string from CPC( R) that contained the sequence of a given edge as substring, also must contain its MES extension as a substring. Finally, to show that SPG 0(R) ≤ SPG( R) consider a vertex v in SPG( R). v is a MES with respect to CPC( R), thus v is also a MES with respect to a larger chromosome-set CPC(SPG 0(R)). Consider a single letter c of v. c corresponds to a vertex in DBG( R, 1) supregraph compressing replaces c

with its MES extension. Since MES extension preserves substring relation, MES extension of c is a substring of MES extension of v, which is equal to v. Therefore for any vertex v in SPG( R) there is a vertex in SPG 0(R), labeled with a substring of v, thus SPG 0(R) ≤ SPG( R). Next we show that multiplexing preserves these properties of the graph. Assume that the multiplexing was applied to a vertex v in supregraph G, resulting in a supregraph G′. Consider a circuit C in G, such that Label (C) ∈ CC( R). If C does not pass through v, then it remains in G′. If C passes through v, the combined label of edges before and after v in C is a substring of C), and thus a substring of CC( R). Thus this pair was retained during multiplexing. Replacing all occurrences of v in C with corresponding vertex, created during multiplexing results in a cycle in G′ with the same label. Therefore labels of all cycles in G

that are also in CC( R) are preserved during multiplexing. Thus CC( R) ⊆ CPC( G′). New vertices and edges added during the multiplexing step are specifically checked by the DSP G condition to be substrings of CC( R). Thus all vertex and edge sequences in G′ are still substrings of CC( R). Finally, consider a vertex u = v in SPG( R) that contains v as a substring. Consider a smallest MES with respect to CPC( G), that contains v as a proper substring and is a substring of u. It exists since u itself is a MES with respect to CC( R) and thus it is a MES s with respect to a larger set CPC( G). By lemma A11.1 

s is a vertex adjacent to v in G. Since v is the only deleted vertex, we infer that any vertex sequence in SPG( R) has at least one vertex from G′ as a substring. Therefore G′ ≤ SPG( R). This concludes the proof that the multiplexing process preserves three properties of the graph: G ≤

SPG( R), CC( R) ⊆ CPC( G), and every edge in G is a substring of CPC( R). To complete the proof assume that G is the final result of the multiplexing process. The process stops when no new junction can be selected for multiplexing. Thus every junction vertex is a conductor with respect to CC( R). Since every vertex contains junction vertex as a substring (minimal vertex contained within a given vertex as a substring is always junction), every vertex in the graph is a conductor. We can show by induction on the walk length that every walk label in G is a substring og SPG( R). As a base we have shown that every edge in the graph is a substring of SPG( R). Consider a walk P and an edge uv , where 36 u is the last vertex in P . By induction assumption, Label (P ) and Label (uv ) are substrings of SPG( R). Since 

u is a conductor, by lemma A7.3, we infer that Label (P + uv ) is also a substring of CC( R). Consider an arbitrary circuit C in G and a walk P , obtained from C by breaking it in vertex v. Label (P ) is a substring of CC( R) and v is a conductor. Thus by lemma A7.4 Label (C) ∈ CC( R). Therefore CPC( G) ⊆ CC( R). We have already shown that CC( R) ⊆ CPC( G), therefore CC( R) = CPC( G). By theorem 15 SPG( R) ≤ G.We have already shown that G ≤ SPG( R). Thus G = SPG( R), which shows that regardless of the order of steps, final result of multiplexing procedure is always SPG( R). Finally to show that the process ends in a finite number of steps we note that every multiplexing step removes from the graph a non-conductor vertex. The same vertex can not be removed twice and there is a finite amount of non-conductor strings since CC( R) is finitely-conducting chromosome-set (theorem 7). Therefore the process is finite. 

Theorem 17. Multiplexing with the decision rule DR always stops in a finite number of steps and regardless of the operation order the result is the same condensed supregraph SP G ∗(R) = Multiplex ∗(SP G (R), D R).

SP G ∗(R) contains vertex with label M ES (r) for every non-contained read r from R.

Proof . Since only proper infixes of reads are used for multiplexing operations and the same vertex can not be used twice, the length of the process is finite. Moreover, the length of the process is always the same since every conductor MES that is a proper infix of a read will be the focus of multiplexing operation exactly once during the process. Consider the final graph SP G ∗(R). We will show that the set of vertices in it is the same regardless of the order of operations. Consider a vertex v in this graph. It cannot be a proper infix of a read since otherwise the process would not stop at this graph. If this vertex was present in the initial graph, it would never be removed from the graph regardless of the order of operations. Thus this vertex belongs to any other possible final graph. If v was not present in the initial graph, it was added during one of the multiplexing operations. Let multiplexing in vertex u be the the operation that added v. At the moment of this operation, u is a junction vertex. Thus by lemma A11.1 vertices adjacent to u at that moment are the minimal MES that contain u

as a proper substring. This set does not depend on the order of operations, thus vertex v would be added to the graph regardless of the order of operations. v also would never be removed since it is only removed when multiplexing operation is centered on it and it is impossible since v is not a proper infix of any read. Therefore, regardless of the order of operation, the set of vertices (and thus the entire graph) will be the same. Let r be a non-contained read. Assume that s is no proper infix of M ES (r) = asb that is a conductor MES but is not a proper infix of r. In such case r is a substring of either as or sb (or both). Both as and 

sb and MES, a contradiction, since M ES (r) is the smallest MES that contains r as a substring. Assume r does not contain a MES conductor as a proper infix. Then M ES (r) does not contain one also. By theorem 7, thus M ES (r) is a MES conductor. Thus M ES (r) ∈ Core(CC( R)) = V (SPG( R)). In addition, M ES (r) cannot be removed from graph by multiplexing process since a superstring of a non-contained read cannot be a proper infix of another read. Thus M ES (r) is present in SPG ∗(R). Let s be the largest conductor MES that is present a proper infix in r. Multiplexing must be applied to 

s once. Let M ES (r) = asb . Consider the smallest b′ such that sb ′ is a conductor MES and b′ is a prefix of 

b. If b̸ = b′, r either contains sb ′ as a proper infix, which is impossible since s is the largest such string, or r

is contained within asb ′, which is impossible since asb is the smallest MES, that contains r. Thus b = b′ and by lemma A11.1, sb is a vertex that was adjacent to s when multiplexing was applied to s. Similarly as is also a vertex adjacent to s. Free multiplexing at s adds asb = M ES (r) as a new vertex. As discussed above this vertex can never be removed from the graph, thus M ES (r) is present in SPG ∗(R) in case r contains a proper infix conductor MES too. 

Proposition A11.3. Let G be a non-redundant splitting assembly graph without prefix and suffix edges, such that CPC (G) consists of all cyclic strings. If G contains an edge of length at least k + 1 , it can not contain vertices shorter than k.

Proof . We will show by induction on 1 ≤ t ≤ k − 1 that there are no vertices of length t in G. Let t-mers 

s1 and s2 be neighbours ( s1a = bs 2 for some letters a, b ). We will show that if s1 is not a vertex in G, then 

s2 also is not a vertex. Assume that G contains vertex s2 Let C be a cycle in the graph such that Label (C) contains cs 1b as a substring where c is a letter. By induction assumption all vertices have length at least t = |s1|. Thus every 37 (t + 1)-mer from Label (C) is a substring of at least one edge. If edges, covering ( t + 1)-mers cs 1 and s1b

are different the vertex between them would be a substring of s1, which is impossible. Thus for any letter 

c there is edge ec that contains cs 1b as a substring. Moreover, all these edges must end in vertex s2 since is a suffix fo cs 1b = cas 2. However, all such edges end with as 2, which is impossible in a splitting graph, a contradiction. Therefore s2 is not present a a vertex in G.To complete the induction step we note that since G contains an edge of length k + 1, it can not contain vertices labeled as proper infixes of the edge. Thus for every 1 ≤ t ≤ k − 1 there is at least one t-mer missing from the graph. Since every t-mer is reachable from any other t-mer we can conclude that no t-mer is present in G for 1 ≤ t ≤ k − 1. Consider the example discussed at the end of section 6. There, we analyzed a read set capable of representing an arbitrary sequence over the alphabet. Constructing a genome candidate that preserves the representation of this read set—when one of the reads has length k + 1—requires introducing a vertex or edge whose multiplicity matches that of this sequence. In particular, such an element must have length at least k + 1. However, proposition A11.3 implies that graphs of this type cannot contain vertices of length less than k. This establishes a lower bound on the structural complexity of the graph. 

# Appendix A12. Optimal genome assembly 

Theorem 18. For any read set R and a set of multiplicity conditions M defined on non-contained reads: 

OptimalAssembly (R|M) = Superstrings (OA (GC (R|M)) , R1),

where R1 denotes the set of unique reads from R.

Proof . The condensing step merges each unbranching path into a single vertex. This vertex inherits flow conditions from all merged vertices. Therefore, the final condensed graph can also be considered as a network with capacities inherited from the network defined by SP G ∗(R) and N. If any of the vertices in the unbranching path was unique, then the condensed vertex becomes the smallest one that contains the sequence of a unique read. In absence of topology condition, any circuit decomposition of a circulation in the constructed network is a genome candidate. Thus we need to prove that the vertices marked as unique in the network are the longest sequences that are present in any decomposition of any valid circulation, assuming that every edge is present in at least one valid circulation (since we removed every edge that was not). Consider a unique vertex v and the shortest closed path P that contains v. Every genome path candidate going through v also goes through P . Also Label (P ) = Label (v). Let P end in vertex u and e be an edge, outgoing from u. There is at least one circulation C that uses edge e. We claim that there exists a decomposition of this circulation, that contains path P e . Indeed P and e must each be present in any decomposition of C. If P does not continue with e, it must continue with some edge e′, while e is preceded by some walk P ′. Switching in u connections P e ′ and P ′e into connections P e and P ′e′ creates a different decomposition but does not change vertex multiplicities. Thus we can find a decomposition that contains 

P e as a subpath. Since v must be present exactly once in any path decomposition, there is no other path going through v in this genome candidate, except the one containing P e . Similarly one can find a genome path candidate that contains P e ′ but not P e for another edge e′, outgoing from v. Combining this with similar lggic applied to the start of path P , we conclude that it is impossible to prolong path P to a longer path that is present in any circulation decomposition. Therefore the procedure UniqueOptimal constructs all optimal contigs that contain unique vertices as substrings. 38