Title: 2604.19815v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.19815v1

Published Time: Thu, 23 Apr 2026 00:01:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
1

# Large Language Models Meet Biomedical Knowledge 

# Graphs for Mechanistically Grounded Therapeutic 

# Prioritization 

Chih -Hsuan Wei 1* , Chi -Ping Day 2* , Zhizheng Wang 1* , Christine C. Alewine 3, Betty Tyler 4, Hasan Slika 4,

David Saraf 4, Chin -Hsien Tai 5, Joey Chan 1, Robert Leaman 1 and Zhiyong Lu 1†

> 1

Division of Intramural Research (DIR), National Library of Medicine (NLM), National Institutes of Health 

(NIH); Bethesda, MD 20894, USA 

> 2

Cancer Data Science Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute (NCI), National 

Institutes of Health (NIH) , Bethesda, MD 20894, USA 

> 3

Dartmouth Health, Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, NH, USA 

> 4

Hunterian Neurosurgical Laboratory, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA 

> 5

National Cancer Institute (NCI), National Institutes of Health (NIH) , Bethesda, MD 20894, USA 

> *

Equal contribution.  †To whom correspondence should be addressed:  zhiyong.lu@nih.gov 

## Abstract 

Drug repurposing is often framed as a candidate identification task, but existing approaches provide 

limited guidance for distinguishing biologically plausible candidates from historically well -connected 

ones. Here we introduce DrugKLM, a hybrid framework that integrates biomedical knowledge graph 

structure with large language model -based mechanistic reasoning to enable mechanistically grounded 

therapeutic prioritization. Across benchmark datasets, DrugKLM outperforms knowledge graph –only and 

language model -only baselines, including TxGNN. Beyond improved recall, DrugKLM confidence scores 

exhibit functional alignment with molecular phenotypes: higher scores are associated with 

transcriptional signatures linked to improved survival across 12 TCGA cancers. The scoring framework 

preferentially captures biologically perturbational signals rather than historical indication patterns. 

Expert curation across five cancers further reveals systematic differences in prioritization behavior, with 

DrugKLM elevating candida tes supported by coherent mechanistic rationale and disease -specific clinical 

context. Together, these results establish DrugKLM as an evidence -integrative framework that translates 

heterogeneous biomedical data into mechanistically interpretable and clini cally grounded therapeutic 

hypotheses. 

## Introduction 2

Drug repurposing - the identification of new therapeutic uses for existing drugs - offers a practical 

strategy to accelerate drug development. However, identifying clinically meaningful repurposing 

opportunities remains challenging because biomedical knowledge is vast , heterogeneous, and 

distributed across structured databases (e.g., drug –gene associations , ontologies), unstructured 

literature (e.g., PubMed abstracts, clinical trial reports ), high -dimensional molecular datasets, and 

diverse clinical outcomes. 

In precision medicine, computational repurposing strategies typically rely on one of several paradigms: 

knowledge graph (KG s) inference 1-3, molecular similarity 4,5 , perturbational signatures 6,7 , large language 

models (LLMs) 8,9 , or hybrid approaches 10 -16 . KG -based systems exploit structured biological networks to 

infer candidates from topological relationships among drugs, genes, and diseases. For example, the 

recent TxGNN 3 system leverages graph neural networks over large -scale biomedical knowledge graphs to 

prioritize drug –disease associations through inductive link prediction based on relational connectivity 

patterns. As such, TxGNN sets a new state of the art in drug repurposing prediction. In contrast, LLM -

based pipelines synthesize unstructured textual knowledge to generate therapeutic hypotheses through 

free -text reasoning .

Despite demonstrated utility , most existing methods emphasize a limited subset of available evidence .

KG -based approaches may underutilize rapidly evolving textual knowledge dispersed the literature, 

whereas LLM -based approaches may lack explicit grounding in the relational structure of large -scale 

biological networks. This separation can limit interpretability, mechanistic transparency, and clinical 

alignment . To address this gap , we introduce DrugKLM , a hybrid framework that unifies structured 

knowledge with mechanistic LLM reasoning to both generate candidate therapies and evaluate them 

through an interpretable scoring function. DrugKLM integrates evidence from KG subgraphs, literature -

derived associations , gene –drug –disease relationships , and pathway -level perturbational signatures .

These signals are synthesized through a structured chain -of -thought (CoT) process that yields an 

interpretable confidence score for each drug -disease pair prediction .

We evaluate whether our scoring function captures clinically meaningful signals using complementary 

quantitative and expert -driven analyses . First, we assess survival relevance by testing whether higher 

DrugKLM scores correspond to transcriptional signatures associated with improved patient survival 

across multiple The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) cancer cohorts 17 . Second, we conduct expert curation 

of top -ranked predictions across five cancers , examining alignment with disease -specific clinical evidence 

from ClinicalTrials.gov 18 and the biomedical literature, and compari ng ranking behavior with TxGNN . To 

demonstrate its real -world utility, we further present a melanoma case study where DrugKLM supports 

subtype candidate prioritization and mechanistic hypothesis generation for downstream experimental 

and translational investigation. 

Together, t hese analyses demonstrate that DrugKLM integrates heterogeneous biomedical evidence into 

a scoring frame work that not only combines knowledge graph structure with mechanis tic LLM reasoning, 

but also enables explicit tracing of supporting evidence across drug -, gene -, and pathway -level signals. By 

systematically evaluating the relative strength and limitations of distinct evidence types within a unified 

scoring scheme, DrugKLM provides an interpretable prioritization strategy aligned with both mec hanistic 

reasoning and clinical signals. The breadth of quantitative, survival -based, clinical -trial, and expert -

curated evaluations further establishes a comprehensive validation paradigm that may serve as a 

reference framework for future computational drug repurposing studies. 3

## Results 

Overview of DrugKLM and Its Clinically Validated Multi -Evidence Scoring Framework 

DrugKLM first standardizes the input disease description to support downstream knowledge graph (KG) 

inference and evidence integration (Fig. 1a). The raw disease description text is parsed to extract the 

disease name and genomic variant. The disease name is linked to a disease entity in the KG by exact 

string match ; if no exact match is available, the closest parent or related entity is selected based on 

semantic similarity computed by MedCPT , a state -of -the -art biomedical text encoder . The original 

disease description is retained to condition subsequent language model –based candidate generation 

and scoring, while the mapped KG entity is used for graph -based retrieval. 

DrugKLM then constructs a high -coverage candidate pool (Fig. 1b) by integrating structured graph 

inference with mechanis tic language model reasoning. Drugs are ranked using two Hierarchy -Aware 

Knowledge Graph (HAKE )19 embedding models trained on PrimeKG 20 : a baseline structural model (KGE) 

and a literature -weighted variant ( KGwE ) that incorporates publication -derived edge evidence. KGE relies 

solely on graph topology, whereas KGwE weights relationships by supporting literature. Using both 

models balance s structurally inferred associations with evidence -supported relationships. 

In parallel, DrugKLM applies a two -step prompting strategy . First, the model decomposes the disease 

into mechanistic drivers, including molecular and pathophysiological processes (e.g., dysregulated 

pathways, causal genes, disrupted biological processes) . Second, it proposes drugs that target those 

mechanisms . Together, these channels provide complementary strengths : KG -based models capture 

latent topological structure in biomedical knowledge graphs, while the LLM contributes context -

dependent mechanistic reasoning .

For each disease –drug pair (Fig . 1c) , DrugKLM assembles a multi -evidence profile from three 

perspectives :

• Drug evidence : KG subgraphs, FDA label statements, and literature snippets. 

• Gene evidence : literature -based annotations 21,22 that capture gene –disease and gene –drug 

associations, along with gene -level support derived from KGE .

• Pathway evidence : drug perturbational expression signatures from SigCom -LINCS 23 integrated 

with IC50 information from GDSC (Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer) 24 to construct up -

and down - regulated gene sets aligned with disease pathways. 

This multi -evidence profile is processed through a structured CoT framework that highlights supporting 

facts (Fig . 1d) , explicitly weighs risks and limitations, and assigns a 0 –100 confidence score using a fixed 

scoring guideline . These criteria were developed in consultation with domain experts to identify key 

factors relevant to drug –disease evaluation and are explicitly encoded in the evaluation prompt, to 

ensure adherence to a predefined, expert -informed process. 

In the final stage (Fig. 1e), a GPT -based model integrates FDA approval status, ClinicalTrials.gov records ,

and disease -specific literature to assign each drug to a standardized clinical stage. To focus on candidates 

of practical interest, DrugKLM applies two filters : (1) restricting to FDA -approved drugs to enable 

repurposing, and (2) prioritizing clinical stages most relevant to researchers and clinicians. 4

Fig. 1 The DrugKLM framework for drug repurposing and clinically validated multi -evidence scoring. (a)

Context interpretation : The LLM standardizes the disease query by extracting the full disease name, 

subtype, and relevant variants, and maps the refined description to the most appropriate KG entity using Prompt for 

mechanisms 

Q. 

A.{ }

LLM 

Prompt for 

drugs 

Q. 

A.{ }

LLM 

KGwE 

KGE 

50 drugs 

100 drugs 

100 drugs 

50 drugs 

50 drugs 

50 drugs 

(b) Candidate Generation 

> …

(a) Context 

Interpretation 

(b) Candidate 

Generation 

(c) Evidence 

Exploration 

(d) Chain of 

Thought 

(e) 

Categorization 

Genes Direction IC50 Dose Drug CellLine Mutation Disease 

…KCNJ2 VPS8 RRAGC up 5.848 10uM afatinib A375 BRAF V600E melanoma 

…DNMT1 S100A7 PCNA down 5.848 10uM afatinib A375 BRAF V600E melanoma 

... COLGALT2 TIMP3 CDKN2C up 36.564 1uM erlotinib A375 BRAF V600E melanoma 

…STEAP1 SPINK1 PCP4 down 36.564 1uM erlotinib A375 BRAF V600E melanoma 

…UBE2S PRPF4 ITGAE up N/A 0.5uM neratinib A375 BRAF V600E melanoma 

(c) Evidence Exploration 

Drug -Disease pair 

Prompt for disease -

associate genes 

Q. 

A.{ ….} 

LLM 

Literature snippets 

Fluoxetine significantly 

inhibited melanoma solid 

tumor growth 

Drug Evidence 

FDA -statements 

Indication & usage 

Contraindications 

Warnings 

KG sub -graph Disease 

> Drug

Gene Evidence 

KG sub -graph 

Literature snippets 

External resource 

CTD | PubTator | DGIdb | LINCS 

It appears that the inhibitory 

effect of fluoxetine on tumor 

growth is not related with 

changes in cytokine levels 

except for IL -10. Disease 

> Gene
> Drug

KGE for Top -100 disease -

associated genes 

Extracting 

evidence of 

gene relevance 

on the drug/ 

disease pair Extracting evidence 

of drug relevance 

on a disease 

SigCom LINCS 

+GDSC 

Pathway 1 Pathway 2 Pathway 3 Pathway 4 Pathway 5 

Pathway Evidence 

Enrichr 

Top 100 Up -

regulate genes 

Top 100 Down -

regulate genes 

Rank by IC50 & Dose 

Search CellLine by 

disease & variant 

Searching the literature 

evidence of the drug to 

the disease -associated -

genes 

No evidence (skipped) 

Literature evidence confirmed 

Gene Evidence 

Summary 

(d) Chain of Thought Scoring 

Supporting 

Evidence 

Highlight 

Risk and 

Limitation 

Analysis 

Confidence 

Scoring 

Drug 

Evidence 

Gene 

Evidence 

Pathway 

Evidence 

Disease 

Statement 

Reasoning 

Disease 

Statement 

Variant statement 

Disease 

in KGE 

(a) Context Interpretation 

BRAF V600E 

mutated cutaneous 

melanoma 

(e) Labeling 

Clinicaltrials.gov 

PubMed 

> …
> …
> FDA Approved for
> Target Disease
> Clinical Trials
> Pre -Clinical
> Rarely Discussed
> Pre -Clinical

Categorization 

> Clinical Trials
> Pre -Clinical
> Rarely Discussed
> FDA
> Approved
> For other
> indication
> (2) Interesting
> stage
> (1) Drugs for
> repurposing
> Interesting
> drugs

OpenFDA 5

MedCPT. (b) Candidate generation: HAKE -based KG embeddings combined with a mechanism -aware LLM 

propose mechanism -aligned candidates. (c) Evidence exploration: Drug, gene, and pathway evidence are 

integrated from KG subgraphs, curated resources, FDA statements, and LINCS expression signatures. ( d)

Chain -of -thought scoring: A fixed scoring criteria synthesizes evidence and assigns confidence score s. (e) 

Categorization: GPT -based integration of regulatory status, clinical trial records, and literature evidence 

assign s candidate drugs to standardized clinical stages. 

Recall Evaluation on PharmacotherapyDB 

Recall evaluation asse sses how effectively DrugKLM retrieves known therapeutic relationships from 

benchmark datasets, providing a direct measure of its ability to recover clinically validated drug -disease 

associations. We evaluated recall using PharmacotherapyDB ( https://github.com/dhimmel/indications ), 

a physician -curated catalog of drug therapies, covering 91 diseases and 1 ,145 therapeutic indications 

(excluding 243 non -indications), widely used as a benchmark in drug -indic ati on studies 25,26 .

To isolate examine the contributions of language -based and knowledge graph –based reasoning, we 

compared six model configurations on PharmacotherapyDB (Fig. 2a). A single -prompt GPT -4.0 model 

(LLM) achieved the lowest recall (14.15%). In contrast, our two -stage prompting strategy (LLM +)

substantially improved recall to 60.26% , indicating that mechanism -level decomposition can enhance 

LLM inference .

We next evaluated three knowledge graph embedding configurations . The base HAKE model (KGE), 

trained on PrimeKG 20 , recovered 57.03% of known disease -drug links by leveraging hierarchical structure 

in the KG. The evidence -weighted variant ( KGwE ), which incorporates literature -derived edge weights 

from PubTator 22 , achieved higher recall (62.18%) by emphasizing experimentally or clinically supported 

relationships. Combining both embeddings (KGE ꓴKGwE ) further increased recall to 67.86%, 

outperforming either model alone. 

Fig. 2b shows the distribution of therapeutic indications recovered by LLM +, KGE, and KGwE . KGE and 

KGwE models produce closely related but complementary results, indicating that literature weighting 

provides additional gains beyond structural embeddings alone . In contrast, the overlap between the KG -

based models and LLM + is smaller, with many indications uniquely identified by one approach. These 

results demonstrate that KG embeddings and LLM -based reasoning capture largely distinct therapeutic 

signals and are therefore complementary within DrugKLM .

Because pretrained weights for TxGNN are not publicly available , direct benchmark ing was not feasible. 

Instead, we queried the TxGNN web interface for 13 diseases (10 cancers and 3 chronic diseases ),

included in PharmacotherapyDB. As shown in Fig . 2c, DrugKLM achieved 78.47% recall compared with 

61.24% for TxGNN (diseases listed in Supplementary Table S 1). 6

Fig. 2 Recall evaluation and clinical -trial alignment across benchmark and ClinicalTrials.gov analysis . (a) 

Recall on PharmacotherapyDB across six configurations, illustrating the contributions of mechanistic 

prompting (LLM +), knowledge graph embeddings (KGE, KGwE , KGE ꓴKGwE ), and the full DrugKLM .

DrugKLM achieves the highest recall. (b) Venn diagram showing overlap among LLM +, KGE, and KGwE .

Percentages on PharmacotherapyDB indicate the proportion of indications uniquely or jointly recognized 

by each method . Percentages sum to 81.05%, corresponding to the overall recall achieved by DrugKLM in 

panel (a). (c) Recall comparison between DrugKLM and TxGNN on 13 diseases available through the 

TxGNN web interface. DrugKLM demonstrates substantially higher recall. 

Clinical Vali dation of DrugKLM Scores: Survival -Relevan ce 

To evaluate whether DrugKLM scores reflect mechanistic and clinical relevance, we computed 

confidence scores for 150 drugs per a given indicated cancer and examined whether higher scores were 

associated with clinical efficacy . Drug perturbational gene expression (DPGE) signatures from SigCom -

LINCS were used as surrogate marker s of drug -induced effect s in cancer cells . We then assessed whether 

expression of these DPGE signatures in tumors was associated with patient survival across multiple TCGA 

cancer cohorts. 

We collected bulk transcriptomic data of 12 cancer types (Supplementary Table S 1) from TCGA . For each 

drug -di sease pair , enrichment of the corresponding DPEG signature was computed for each tumor within 

the indicated cancer type. Patients were stratified by enrichment scores , and survival analysis was 

performed to estimate hazard ratio s (HR) (see Methods) . An HR > 1 indicates that the drug -induced 

signature is associated with reduce d survival probability, and vice versa. We computed the Spearman 14.15%  

> 60.26%
> 57.03%
> 62.18%
> 0.6786
> 81.05%
> LLM
> LLM+
> KGE
> KGwE
> KGE ∪KGwE
> DrugKLM
> Recall on PharmacotherapyDB subset
> (13 diseases)
> (a) (b)
> 61.24%
> 78.47%
> TxGNN
> DrugKLM
> Recall on PharmacotherapyDB
> (c)
> Overlap of drug candidates identified
> by three approaches
> LLM+
> KGwE
> KGE
> 31.88 %
> 19.30 %
> 6.38 %
> 2.97 %
> 13.0 1%
> 2.88 %
> 4.63 %

7

correlation between DrugKLM confidence scores and HRs to assess alignment . Because HR estimates for 

sparsely represented drug –disease pairs are unstable, analysis was restricted to pairs with adequate 

sample representation and observed survival events. 

Across the 12 cancers, the pooled Spearman correlation between HR and DrugKLM score was negative 

and statistically significant (r = −0.1 49 , p = 0. 01 07 ; Fig. 3a ), indicating that higher DrugKLM scores are 

associated with putative drug efficacy that improved survival in aggregate analyses . In contrast , TxGNN 

showed a positive but non -significant correlation (r = 0.0 37 , p = 0. 7863 ; Supplementary Fig. S1 a). As 

expected, correlation magnitude and direction varied across individual cancers, particularly those with 

fewer evaluable pairs. 

We next compared DrugKLM and TxGNN directly across survival evidence (Fig. 3 b). Each drug –disease 

pair is plotted with its TxGNN score (x-axis ) and DrugKLM score (y-axis ), colored by TCGA -derived hazard 

ratio. Pairs associated with better survival tend to cluster at higher DrugKLM scores, indicating closer 

alignment with survival data relative to TxGNN .

To quantify the contribution of individual evidence sources, we performed leave -one -evidence -out 

ablation analyses, removing each evidence component and re -running the full scoring pipeline. We also 

evaluated a scoring -paradigm ablation in which the structured chain -of -thought module was replaced 

with a fixed , rule -based scoring scheme while keeping the same evidence inputs. As shown in Fig. 3 c,

removal of any single evidence source consistent ly reduc ed alignment with TCGA survival outcomes 

indicated by HR , demonstrating that DrugKLM benefits from complementary evidence integration .

Pathway evidence ablation produced the largest reduction in survival correlation, whereas its impact on 

ClinicalTrials.gov alignment was comparatively modest (Fig 3c and S2c) . The scoring prompt for 

automated ClinicalTrials.gov –based relevance evaluation is shown in Fig. S4 . This pattern is expected, as 

gene set enrichment analysis ( GSEA ) captures pathway -level biological signals that are more directly 

reflected in pharmacological action and therefore survival associations , as compared to the downstream 

clinical -trial outcomes. In contrast, gene - and drug -level evidence contributed more strongly to clinical -

trial alignment, consistent with their proximity to therapeutic indication . To gether, these findings 

indicate that DrugKLM integrates evidence across multiple pharmacological and clinical resolutions. 

Replacing CoT -based scoring with a structured, criteria -based scheme led to a substantially larger 

reduction in correlation than removal of any individual evidence source. The non -CoT baseline applie d a

domain -informed evaluation prompt (Supplementary Fig. S 3) with fixed scoring dimensions but 

suppress ed intermediate reasoning steps. The resulting performance gap highlights the importance of 

reasoning -enabled evidence integration - rather than differences in scoring criteria or domain knowledge 

- in driving DrugKLM’s clinical alignment. 

Human Expert Curation Reveals Systematic Differences in Ranking Behavior between DrugKLM and 

TxGNN 

To evaluate whether model rankings align with expert clinical reasoning beyond benchmark recall and 

trial coverage, we conducted human curation of the top 30 drugs ranked by DrugKLM and TxGNN across 

five cancer s: liver cancer, colon cancer, pancreatic cancer, melanoma, and glioblastoma. Curation was 

performed by clinicians and cancer researchers with formal biomedical training and experience 

evaluating clinical evidence. All curators followed a unified annotation guideline, specifying standardized 8

criteria for clinical evidence status, FDA approval context, and treatment modality, as detailed on our 

GitHub repository. Each drug –disease pair was manually reviewed and categorized according to the 

highest level of clinical evidence achieved for the spe cified disease, irrespective of whether evidence 

arose from monotherapy or combination therapy . FDA approval status for other indications and 

treatment modality were also recorded . Curated raw data is provided in Supplementary Table S 2.

As shown in Fig. 3d, DrugKLM and TxGNN exhibit distinct distributions of clinical evidence levels among 

their top -ranked predictions. DrugKLM more frequently prioritizes drugs supported by positive 

mechanistic or clinical evidence, reflecting a stronger emphasis on biologically grounded and clinically 

actionable candidates . In contrast, TxGNN includes a higher proportion of candidates less frequently 

discussed in disease -specific clinical contexts and supported by fewer focused studies, consistent with its 

design goal of prioritizing candidates for rare or under -studied diseases. 

Analysis of curated drug class es further reveals systematic differences in the therapeutic classes (Fig. 3e) .

Across the five cancers, DrugKLM predictions are enriched for targeted small -molecule therapies and 

immunotherapies, whereas TxGNN predictions include a larger fraction of cytotoxic chemotherapies. 

DrugKLM preferentially ranks pathway -specific , mechanism -aligned agents, such as BRAF inhibitors (e.g., 

vemurafenib ) for V600E -mutated melanoma – whose i dentification requires explicit disease –gene –

pathway reasoning and cannot be recovered reliably through drug –drug similarity or indication co -

occurrence alone. In contrast, TxGNN more frequently prioritizes cytotoxic agents with broad historical 

use across cancer types (e.g., lomustine and carmustine ) which exhibit high connectivity in knowledge 

graphs and literature . Notably, many of these broadly used chemotherapies are also identified by 

DrugKLM but are assigned lower confidence scores and ranked below mechanism -aligned candidates, 

reflecting DrugKLM ’s preference for disease -specific biological relevance over historical prevalence .

We additionally performed an automated ClinicalTrials.gov –based relevance analysis (Supplementary 

Materials ). Because this analysis relies on an AI reviewer , it is not treated as primary clinical validation .

However , the resulting ranking patterns were consistent with human curation : higher -ranked DrugKLM 

candidates were more frequently associated with stronger trial -based relevance than those prioritized by 

TxGNN (Supplementary Fig. S2). 9

Fig . 3. Clinical validation of DrugKLM confidence scores across survival and expert curation . (a) 

Relationship between DrugKLM confidence scores and hazard ratios (HRs) derived from TCGA 

transcriptional signatures across 12 cancer s. Each point represents a drug –disease pair with sufficient 

sample support. Higher DrugKLM scores correspond to lower HRs, indicating alignment with improved 

survival. (b) Direct comparison of DrugKLM and TxGNN scores for drug –disease pairs with TCGA survival 

data. Points are colored by HR. More favorable survival out comes cluster at higher DrugKLM scores. (c) 

Leave -one -evidence -out and scoring -paradigm ablation analysis. Each evidence component (drug, gene, 

or pathway) was removed in turn, and the full pipeline was re -run. A separate ablation replaced chain -of -

thought (CoT) scoring with a fixed rule –based scheme using identical evidence inputs. Spearman 

correlations with TCGA survival and ClinicalTrials.gov endpoints are reported. (d) Distribution of clinical 

evidence levels among the top30 ranked drugs, categorized by positive outcomes, ongoing trials, and 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80    

> TxGNN
> DrugKLM
> TxGNN
> DrugKLM
> TxGNN
> DrugKLM
> TxGNN
> DrugKLM
> Positive result ongoing clinical trial Negative result
> Of interest Not interest

(a) (b) Comparison: DrugKLM vs TxGNN on TCGA 

dataset 

Hazard Ratio (HR) 

> DrugKLM confidence score

Spearman correlation on TCGA dataset 

r= -0.149, p= 0.0107 

TxGNN confidence score 

> DrugKLM confidence score
> Hazard Ratio (HR)

p-value Spearman r 

0.0107 -0.149 DrugKLM 

0.0447 -0.118 DrugKLM w/o Drug Evidence 

0.0496 -0.110 DrugKLM w/o Gene Evidence 

0.0106 -0.092 DrugKLM w/o Pathway Evidence 

0.0641 -0.031 DrugKLM w/o CoT (using heuristic rule for scoring) 

(c) Leave -one -evidence -out ablation analysis on TCGA dataset 

(d) Clinical maturity distribution of top -30 drugs of the 5 

diseases 

> In pre -clinical
> In clinical trial
> FDA -Approved for
> target disease

DrugKLM TxGNN 

> Targeted small -molecule therapy
> Biologic / Immunotherapy
> Cytotoxic chemotherapy
> Repurposed non -oncologic agents

(e) Therapeutic class distribution of the top -30 drugs of the 5 

diseases 

> Rarely discussed

10 

negative results. (e) Therapeutic class distribution of the top30 drugs ranked by DrugKLM and TxGNN 

across five cancer s.

Use Case Study: Atovaquone for Melanoma 

DrugKLM generates ranked confidence scores for hundreds of drug –disease pairs, but practical 

application requires translating these associations into biologically meaningful hypotheses. We therefore 

present a melanoma case study illustrati ng how DrugKLM supports candidate selection by integrating 

subtype -specific confidence profiling with global confidence patterns. 

Melanoma is classified into four major subtypes by occurring sites - cutaneous, acral, mucosal, and uveal .

Although all four derived from melanocytes, and share core developmental programs and driver 

pathways , they exhibit distinct pathological and molecular features. Because cutaneous melanoma 

accounts for over 90% of all melanoma cases, most therapies were developed for this subtype and 

subsequently applied to others, despite heterogeneous treatment responses. Deciphering therapies 

with consistent or subtype -specific efficacy remains an urgent clinical need for melanoma treatment 27 .

To address this issue , we applied DrugKLM to all four melanoma subtypes. For drugs detected across 

subtypes, we constructed a four -dimensional confidence profile and applied principal component 

analysis (PCA) to capture patterns of cross -subtype consistency and specificity (Fig . 4a ). Based on the 

distribution of scores among the four melanoma subtypes, we identified five clusters associated with 

distinct indication s, targets, and clinical development stage s (Supplementary Table S6 ). Cluster 1

contained drugs with consistently high and balanced scores across all subtypes, suggesting broadly 

applicable relevance rather than subtype -restricted efficacy .

To prioritize candidate s within Cluster 1, we applied the categorization procedure described in Fig. 1e, 

integrati ng FDA approval status with melanoma -specific evidence from ClinicalTrials.gov and the 

literature. This step filtered for drugs approved for non -melanoma indications but supported by positive 

preclinical evidence in melanoma. Atovaquone emerged as the top -ranked candidate meeting these 

criteria, with high scores across all four subtypes. 

Atovaquone targets mitochondrial complex III and is FDA -approved for parasitic infection . DrugKLM 

predicts potential repurposing for melanoma , particularly combination therapy . Figure 4b -d summarizes 

the model -generated mechanistic rational e and supporting evidence . The KG subgraph ( Fig . 4b ) links 

atovaquone to melanoma biology through mitochondrial respiration, MAPK signaling pathways, 

immune -related apoptosis, and drug transport processes. LINCS -based gene set enrichment analysis (Fig .

4c ) shows enrichment of immune and metabolic pathways, including interferon -gamma signaling, 

complement activation, neutrophil activation, and oxidative stress pathways implicated in melanoma 

response to immune checkpoint blockade (ICB )28,29 . The integrated prediction summary (Fig . 4d )

consolidates DrugKLM score, regulatory status, combination potential , mechanistic rationale, and 

suggested experimental directions. Together, these outputs explain why atovaquone was prioritized 

based on consistent cross -subtype score and mechanistic support. 11 

Fig. 4 Integrated prioritization and mechanistic characterization of a melanoma drug candidate using 

DrugKLM. (a) Principal component analysis (PCA) of subtype -specific DrugKLM confidence scores across 

four melanoma subtypes (cutaneous, uveal, acral, and mucosal), providing a global overview of cross -

subtype confidence patterns among candidate drugs. Each circle represents one or more drugs ; size 

indicates count, color denotes dominant clinical evidence category. (b) Knowledge graph subgraph 

linking atovaqu one to melanoma -related genes and pathways . (c) LINCS –based pathway enrichment of 

atovaquone -induced transcriptional changes. (d) Integrated prediction summary combining multi -level 

evidence. 

In Silico Validation of Atovaquone Efficacy Atovaquone    

> Mitochondrial
> respiration and
> pyrimidine
> biosynthesis
> constraint
> MAPK -driven
> melanoma biology
> BRAF/NRAS/KIT
> DHODH
> Drug transport:
> Efflux,
> bioavailability,
> and resistance
> modulation
> ABCB1
> Melanoma
> MAPK -
> driven
> melanoma
> Atovaquone Immune -related
> apoptosis
> and stress
> signaling
> Tumor suppressor
> response:
> cell cycle arrest and
> apoptosis
> FAS Melanoma
> Stress -and
> immune -
> modulated
> melanoma
> TP53

(b) KG -subgraph evidence and literature snippet explanation 

(c) Pathway evidence by LINCS perturbation –based GESA 

interferon -gamma -

mediated signaling pathway 

Interferon -gamma signaling is 

involved in immune responses 

against melanoma. 

IRF2, TRIM38, CD44, HLA -

DPA1 

hydrogen peroxide 

biosynthetic process 

MAOB, ACOX1 Hydrogen peroxide 

production is linked to 

oxidative stress, which can 

influence cancer cell survival. 

regulation of immune 

effector process and 

complement activation 

Immune effector regulation is 

essential for controlling immune 

responses in melanoma. 

C6, CFH, CD19, PHB2 

neutrophil activation 

involved in immune 

response 

Neutrophil activation is part of 

the immune response, which is 

important in melanoma. 

PSMB7, HEBP2, RAB5B, 

GCA… 

Results Attributes 

Moderate High (70) Confidence level (score) 

FDA -approved for non -melanoma indications: malaria; Pneumocystis pneumonia prophylaxis FDA status 

Combination therapy Combination or mono therapy 

PMID: 39652639 Reference 

Atovaquone inhibits mitochondrial electron transport chain complex III, disrupting oxidative 

phosphorylation and reducing ATP production, which can impair melanoma cell metabolism. GSEA 

pathways such as “regulation of complement activation” and “regulation of immune effector 

process” are upregulated, suggesting immune modulation relevant to melanoma. 

Rationale bullets 

Conduct in vitro assays to evaluate the effect of Atovaquone on melanoma cell lines with BRAF and 

NRAS mutations. 

Investigate the impact of Atovaquone on immune response pathways in melanoma, particularly 

those identified in GSEA (e.g., regulation of complement activation, interferon -gamma -mediated 

signaling). 

Next steps 

(d) Output of prediction 

(a) PCA of drug candidates based on subtype -specific confidence 

scores across four melanoma subtypes. 2

1

3

4

5

* Atovaquone 

*

> 9 drugs
> 4 drugs
> 1 drugs
> # of drugs

12 

Guided by DrugKLM ’s reasoning , we performed virtual efficacy analyses of atovaquone and in 

combination with anti -PD -1 therapy . We defined a target -gene signature comprising mitochondrial 

complex III subunits (CYC1, UQCRFS1, and MT -CYB 30 ). Following prior studies, target -gene expression was 

used as a surrogate for functional activit y31 ; low er expression simulates pharmacologic inhibition .

In TCGA melanoma data, patients stratified by signature expression showed improved survival with 

lower signature levels (HR = 0.56, Fig. 5a) , consistent with potential therapeutic effect .

To evaluate combination therapy , we analyzed GSE91061 32 , which includes pre - and on -treatment 

transcriptom es from melanoma patients receiving nivolumab (anti -PD -1). Lower signature expression 

was associated with improved survival in pre -treatment samples (HR = 0.47 , p = 0.0746 , Fig. 5b ), and 

showed a stronger, statistically significant association in on -treatment samples ( HR = 0.41, p = 0.0475 ;

Fig. 5c ), suggesting atovaquone may enhance ICB therapy .

We further examined context dependenc e using GSE78220 33 , an independent pre -treatment melanoma 

cohort . Immune activation was inferred from combin ed GZMA and PRF1 expression 34 , samples were 

categorized into immune -active, immune -intermediate , and immune -inactive groups . Survival 

association s were more pronounced in immune -active tumors (HR = 0.45; Fig. 5d ) than immune -inactive 

tumors (HR = 1.26 ; Fig . 5e), supporting a potential role for atovaquone in augmenting anti -tumor 

immunity. This finding is consistent with the combination -therapy pattern observed in GSE91061. 

Because GSE91061 includes RECIST response data , we performed receiver operating characteristic (ROC) 

analysis . In pre -treatment samples, the atovaquone signature yielded an area under the curve ( AUC ) of 

0.687 , indicating that lower expression predicted tumor response ( complete or partial ). In on -treatment 

samples, the AUC increased to 0.748 (Fig. 5f) , further suggesting enhanced response potential in 

combination with anti -PD -1 therapy . Finally, we examined atovaquone across nine cancer types to 

evaluate the relationship between DrugKLM confidence scores and disease -specific hazard ratios . Higher 

DrugKLM scores were consistently associated with lower hazard ratios across cancers, ( Figure 5g) ,

indicating concordance between predicted confidence and survival benefit . Taken together, these 

analyses support atovaquone as a mechanistically grounded, cross -subtype melanoma candidate and 

illustrate how DrugKLM integrates multi -level evidence to generate clinically interpretably hypotheses .13 

Fig. 5 In silico validation of atovaquone in melanoma . (a) TCGA Kaplan –Meier survival analysis using the 

atovaquone target –gene signature . ( b,c ) Kaplan –Meier analyses in GSE91061 (pre - and on -treatment ).

(d ,e) Kaplan –Meier analyses in GSE78220 stratified immune activation status. (f) ROC –AUC comparison 

prediction in in pre - and on -treatment settings. ( g) Association between DrugKLM scores and hazard 

ratios across cancer types. 

## Discussion 

In this work, we address a central challenge in computational drug repurposing: whether model -derived 

confidence scores reflect biologically and clinically meaningful prioritization. We introduce DrugKLM as a (a) Target genes (CYC1/UQCRFS1/MT -

CYB) of atovaquone on TCGA (n=459) 

(b) Target genes (CYC1/UQCRFS1) 

of atovaquone on pre -treatment 

samples in GSE91061 (n=51) 

(c) Target genes (CYC1/UQCRFS1) of 

atovaquone on treatment samples in 

GSE91061 (n=58) 

(d) Target genes (CYC1/UQCRFS1) 

of atovaquone on GZMA/PRF1 low 

expression samples in GSE78220 

(n=14) 

(e) Target genes (CYC1/UQCRFS1) of 

atovaquone on GZMA/PRF1 high 

expression samples in GSE78220 

(n=14) 

> Melanoma
> AML
> Sarcoma
> Glioblastoma
> Bladder
> cancer
> rectal
> cancer
> liver
> cancer
> Breast
> cancer
> prostate
> cancer

(g) Hazard ratio vs confidence score 

> 50
> 70
> Confidence
> score
> Rarely
> discussed
> Clinical
> Clinical Stage
> Pre -clinical

Higher target activity 

Lower target activity 

(f) AUC -curve comparing pre - and on -

treatment on atovaquone inhibit genes 

(p=0.5890) 

> Hazard ratio

14 

unified framework that integrates structured biomedical knowledge with mechanism -aware large 

language model (LLM) reasoning to evaluate such scores . Across benchmark recall evaluations, DrugKLM 

outperforms its individual KG -based and LLM -based components as well as the external TxGNN baseline, 

demonstrating the complementary value of combining relational structure with contextual biological 

reasoning. 

Human curation further indicate s that DrugKLM preferentially prioritizes biologically grounded and 

clinically actionable candidates, particularly in diseases with relatively rich mechanistic and clinical 

evidence . This behavior reflects DrugKLM ’s hybrid design: knowledge graph embedding s capture 

structured relational signals, while LLM -based reasoning contributes disease -specific mechanistic 

interpretation . The subsequent evidence -aware scoring step then favors candidates supported by 

coherent biological an d clinical evidence . Independent validation strengthens this interpretation: higher 

DrugKLM confidence scores are associated with survival -linked transcriptional signatures across TCGA 

cohorts. The melanoma case study further illustrates that DrugKLM can prioritize candidates with 

potential clinical efficacy before formal evaluation in the specific indication (Fig . 4). Together , these 

findings suggest that DrugKLM produces rankings grounded in clinical and molecular evidence while 

remaining interpretable through expert assessment, revealing systematic differences from TxGNN’s 

prioritization patte rns. 

TxGNN was selected as the external baseline because it is explicitly designed for large -scale drug –disease 

candidate generation using biomedical knowledge graph s, enabling direct comparison through recall 

benchmarks and clinical -trial alignment . Other recent LLM - or KG -based therapeutic reasoning systems 

were not included due to differences in scope, objectives, or scalability . For example , TxAgent 16 

emphasizes interactive explanation of predefined drug –disease pairs rather than large -scale candidate 

generation. K -Path 35 , CHANCE 36 , and DrugCORpath 37 are designed for task -specific or fixed -vocabulary 

settings and rely on exhaustive path enumeration or computation ally -intensive graph modeling, limiti ng 

their applicability to exploratory , large -scale, repurposing analyses. 

Agent -based systems such as TheraMind 38 and ESCARGOT 1 are typically evaluated within specific disease 

domains (e.g., lung cancer or Alzheimer’s disease) and incorporate domain -specific assumptions and 

resources that limit general -purpose, cross -disease evaluation. Given these differences, TxGNN serves as 

the most appropriate comparator for DrugKLM . Direct quantitative comparison with other systems 

would therefore not be methodologically appropriate or practically feasible. Supplementary Table S 3

summarizes the task formulations of these methods, highlighting differences in user inputs and model 

outputs that make TxGNN the only directly comparable baseline for DrugKLM .

Supplementary Table S 4 further illustrates that most existing approaches rely on a limited subset of 

evidence modalities. In contrast, DrugKLM integrates multiple complementary evidence sources within a 

unified scoring framework, enabling more comprehensive and clinically grounded prioritization. 

Evaluation paradigms in Supplementary Table S5 differ across methods, including zero -shot 

generalization, EMR -based validation , and wet -experimental validation . These reflect distinct objectives 

and are not directl y comparable to DrugKLM’s clinically aligned scoring framework. 15 

Despite the se strengths, several limitations should be noted . First, LLM -based clinical trial scoring is not 

manually adjudicated. Although the scoring prompt was reviewed by domain experts , individual trial 

assessment s are generated automatically, which may limit the capture of nuanced clinical judgment. 

Second, the underlying knowledge graph is incomplete. When a queried disease is not explicitly 

represented in the graph (e.g., “ cutaneous melanoma”), the embedding models fall back to the closest 

parent or related entity (ex., “melanoma”) for candidate retrieval . This approximation can restrict the 

initial candidate pool. However, DrugKLM does not rely solely on this mapping : t he LLM -based candidate 

generation and scoring stages remain conditioned on the original disease description. Consequently, 

subtype information and molecula r features may still influence prioritization even when the graph 

representation is coarse. 

Third , pathway evidence relies on perturbational signatures from SigCom -LINCS, which are largely 

derived from cancer cell lines. This limits the informativeness of the pathway module for non -oncology 

diseases. Nonetheless clinical -trial validation across multiple non -cancer conditions demonstrates 

consistent performance, suggesting that drug - and gene -level evidence modules remain informative 

when LINCS -derived pathway data are sparse or unavailable. 

Several direction s could further strengthen DrugKLM . Expanding the knowledge graph to incorporate 

more comprehensive disease ontologies, molecular interaction networks, and real -world clinical data 

would improve candidate coverage and reduce reliance on approximate disease mappings. Integrating 

additional perturbational datasets beyond cancer -derived LINCS profiles —such as curated 

supplementary materials or public repositories like GEO —could enhance pathway -level evidence for 

non -oncology indications. Prosp ective experimental validation of high -confidence predictions in cellular 

or animal models will be essential to establish biological relevance. Finally, extending DrugKLM to 

support combination -therapy reasoning, temporal modeling of disease progression, and individualized 

patient contexts represents promising directions for increasing translational impact .

## Method 

Context Interpretation 

DrugKLM first processes the free -text disease description to extract key identifiers for downstream 

inference. A dedicated prompt guide s the LLM to extract the primary disease name and any mentioned 

molecular variants ( e.g., BRAFV600E) from the user -provided text. 

To align the disease with the knowledge graph, all disease entities in PrimeKG are embedded using 

MedCPT 39 and the extracted disease name is similarly converted into an embedding. If no exact string 

match exists , the system retrieves the closest disease entity based on embedding similarity. This 

standardized disease representation is used for knowledge graph -based candidate generation and 

evidence integration. 

For example, if the input specifies provides a granular subtype such as “ cutaneous melanoma,” which is 

not explicitly represented in the knowledge graph, the system maps it to the nearest parent entity 

“melanoma” in the embedding space. Importantly , the original user -provided disease description is 

preserved and used to condition downstream LLM -based candidate generation and scoring . This ensur es 

that subtype -specific and molecular context are retained even when the graph mapping is coarse .16 

Candidate Generation 

Mechanism -aware LLM 

To complement knowledge graph –based candidate discovery, DrugKLM employs a mechanism -aware 

large language model (LLM) to propose candidate drugs by decomposing the disease description into 

mechanistic features, including causal pathways, dysregulated genes, and relevant drug –target 

interactions . This component capture s mechanistic context that may not be fully represented in the 

knowledge graph and identifies candidates grounded in textual biomedical knowledge. 

The mechanism -aware module operates using a two -step prompting strategy. The LLM is first prompted 

to decompose the disease into its underlying mechanistic features. This produces a structured 

mechanism profile summariz ing key functional aspects of the disease in a form suitable for downstream 

inference. The LLM is then prompted to identify drugs align ed with the extracted mechanisms. The 

prompt includes the disease context, the specified mechanism, and its role in disease pathogenesis , and 

requests a list of up to 50 single -agent drugs capable of modulati ng th e mechanism. For each drug, the 

model provide s a brief explanation describing how it affects the relevant pathway, target, or biological 

process. Combination therapies are explicitly excluded to maintain focus on single -agent interventions. 

Together, these steps enable the LLM to generate candidate s informed by disease -specific mechanistic 

reasoning . This approach expands the candidate pool beyond what is obtainable through KG embeddings 

alone, particularly for diseases with sparse graph connectivity or mechanisms not fully captured in 

structured resources .

Knowledge Graph Embedding (KGE) Model: Hierarchy -Aware Knowledge Graph Embedding (HAKE) 

To model structured relationships among drugs, diseases, genes, and other biomedical entities, DrugKLM 

employs the Hierarchy -Aware Knowledge Graph Embedding (HAKE) model 19 trained directly on 

PrimeKG 20 . PrimeKG integrates curated biomedical knowledge from multiple authoritative sources and 

provides a relational structure suitable for embedding -based inference. 

In HAKE, each entity and relation is represented using a modulus (radial) component encoding its 

hierarchical depth (i.e., from general to specific) and a phase (angular) component encoding semantic 

similarity. 

For a triple (ℎ, 𝑟 , 𝑡 ), HAKE computes a relevance score: 

𝑠 (ℎ, 𝑟 , 𝑡 ) = −‖ℎ𝑚𝑜𝑑 ∘ 𝑟 𝑚𝑜𝑑 − 𝑡 𝑚𝑜𝑑 ‖2 − 𝜆 ∙ ‖𝑠𝑖𝑛 (ℎ𝑝 ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒 + 𝑟 𝑝 ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒 − 𝑡 𝑝 ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒 

2 )‖

> 1

where  ∘ denotes element -wise multiplication and  𝜆  balances the contribution of hierarch ical structure 

and semantic similarity .

For drug repurposing task, the input is a disease entity  ℎ, and the objective is to identify drug entities  𝑡 

likely connected through the indication relation  𝑟 . Candidate drug s are rank ed according to their HAKE 

scores, which reflect structural proximity within the knowledge graph . The KGE module returns the top 

100 drug candidates with the highest relevance scores. 

Literature -Weighted Knowledge Graph Embedding ( KGwE )17 

To incorporate literature support into the knowledge graph embedding model , we extend HAKE with a 

literature -guided weighting mechanism. Each triple (ℎ, 𝑟 , 𝑡 ) is assigned an initial weight  𝑤 (ℎ,𝑟 ,𝑡 ) 

> (0)

:

𝑤 (ℎ,𝑟 ,𝑡 ) 

> (0)

= 1 + 𝑙𝑜𝑔 (1 + 𝑁 (ℎ,𝑟 ,𝑡 ))

where  𝑁 (ℎ,𝑟 ,𝑡 ) denotes the number of PubMed articles supporting the triple. Article counts were 

obtained using the PubTator API (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/research/pubtator3/api). 

Rather than remaining static, each literature -guided weight  𝑤 (ℎ,𝑟 ,𝑡 ) ∈ [0,1] is modeled as a learnable 

scalar representing confidence in the triple , and is jointly optimized updated with the embedding 

parameters during training. This dynamic weighting allows the model to prioritize literature -supported 

relationships while retaining flexibility to adjust weights based on structural signals .

Training uses a weighted binary cross -entropy (BCE) loss over positive and negative samples. For each 

observed triple (ℎ, 𝑟 , 𝑡 ), a corresponding negative sample (ℎ′, 𝑟 , 𝑡 ′) is generated by randomly corrupting 

either the head or tail entity. Negative samples that already exist in the knowledge graph are filtered out 

to avoid false negatives. 

The weighted loss  𝐿 𝑤  is defined as: 

𝐿 𝑤 = 1 

> ∑𝑤 (ℎ,𝑟 ,𝑡 )

∑ 𝑤 (ℎ,𝑟 ,𝑡 )(ℎ,𝑟 ,𝑡 ) ∙ [−𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝜎 (𝑠 (ℎ, 𝑟 , 𝑡 )) − 𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝜎 (−𝑠 (ℎ′, 𝑟 , 𝑡 ′))]

where  𝑠 (ℎ, 𝑟 , 𝑡 ) is the HAKE scoring function and  𝜎 (∙) denotes the sigmoid function, which maps scores 

to probabilities in [0,1].

This KGwE model enables the embedding space to reflect both structural knowledge and degree of 

literature support , integrating relation inference with evidence strength from biomedical publications. 

Evidence Exploration 

DrugKLM assembles a multi -evidence profile for each drug –disease pair by integrating entity -level and 

pathway -level biomedical signals. Specifically, it aggregates drug -, gene -, and pathway -centered evidence 

derived from the knowledge graph, biomedical literature, and perturbational transcriptomic data. 

Drug -Level E vidence 

To collect drug -level evidence, DrugKLM integrates structured graph signals with text -derived contextual 

evidence .

For each drug –disease pair, the system retrieves shortest paths in PrimeKG that represent relational 

patterns such as shared targets, implicated pathways, or intermediary phenotypes. These paths encode 

potential mechanistic explanations linking the drug and disease. 

To ensure biological interpretab ility, the synergistic interaction relation is excluded from the shortest -

path search. Synergistic interactions describe effects arising only from combination therapy and 

therefore do not represent mechanisms attributable to a single agent. Including such edges could 

introduce combination –specific shortcuts that obscur e mechanistic coherence in single -drug 

repurposing .18 

To prioritize paths, we define a path -based HAKE scoring function that evaluates semantic consistency 

across the sequence of entities and relations. Each edge corresponds to a biological relation in PrimeKG 

(e.g., indication, enzyme, associated with). 

First, the HAKE score for each triple is normalized to a probabilistic scale [0,1] :

𝑠 ′(ℎ, 𝑟 , 𝑡 ) = 1 

> 1+exp (−𝑠 (ℎ,𝑟 ,𝑡 )−𝜇
> 𝜎 )

where  𝜇 = 350  (the offset) and  𝜎 = 100  (the scaling factor). 

For a multi -hop path  𝑃 = (𝑒 0 → 𝑒 1 →∙∙∙→ 𝑒 𝑛 ), the overall path score is computed using the geometric 

mean of the normalized edge scores :

𝑝 (𝑒 0, 𝑒 𝑛 ) = (∏ 𝑠 ′(𝑒 𝑖 ,𝑟 𝑖 , 𝑒 𝑖 +1)𝑛 −1 

> 𝑖 =0

)1 𝑛 −1⁄

The geometric mean ensures comparab ility across paths of different lengths and penalizes longer or 

noisier paths by requiring consistently high scores at each step . This favors shorter, semantically 

coherent paths and reflects increased uncertainty in extended reasoning chains. 

For each drug -disease pair, up to ten highest -scoring shortest paths are retained to construct the 

knowledge subgraph. 

DrucKLM retrieve s literature evidence using the PubTator3 API. For each drug –disease pair, a co -

occurrence query is submitted, and up to five highlighted PubMed snippets mentioning both entities are 

collected . These snippets provide concise contextual signals, including references to prior studies, clinical 

findings , or indirect associations reported in biomedical literature. 

DrugKLM incorporates regulatory context by extracting relevant sections from FDA -approved drug 

labeling . For each candidate drug, the system retrieves statements from sections including indications 

and usage, mechanism of action, contraindications, and warnings and precautions. These provide 

authoritative clinical and regulatory information relevant to repurposing assessment. 

Together, knowledge graph paths, knowledge graph paths, literature snippets and FDA labeling form the 

drug -level evidence used in downstream LLM -based reasoning. The KG subgraphs capture curated 

mechanistic relationships, literature snippets provide contextual natural -language signals , and FDA label s

contribute regulatory and clinical grounding . This integrated evidence supports biologically coherent and 

clinically contextualized drug repurposing predictions .

Gene -Level E vidence 

DrugKLM collects gene -level evidence to characterize genes appear ing in KG subgraphs or literature -

derived signals and to assess their mechanistic contributions to the drug –disease relationship. This 

module integrates structured KG associations, literature -curated annotations, and embedding -based 

proximity signals to quantify a gene’s relevance to both the drug and the disease. 

For each drug –gene pair, DrugKLM aggregates evidence from three complementary categories: 

1.  Literature snippets : Drug –gene co -mention sentences are retrieved using the PubTator3 API and 

cleaned to produce concise snippets reflecti ng co -occurrence in biomedical literature. 19 

2.  External resource evidence: Multiple curated and data -driven resources capture orthogonal signals 

of drug –gene association, including: 

a.  CTD chemical -gene interactions, providing curated interaction types with supporting PMIDs. 

b.  PubTator 3 machine -extracted relations, supply ing automatically identified relation types and 

associated publication counts. 

c.  DGIdb 40 curated interactions, reporting pharmacologic interaction types (e.g., inhibitor, 

activator) and regulatory attributes such as FDA approval or anti -neoplastic annotation. 

d.  SigCom -LINCS perturbational signatures, capturing the direction and magnitude of drug -

induced transcriptomic changes for the gene. 

3.  Knowledge graph paths : DrugKLM retrieves mechanistic paths from PrimeKG connecti ng Disease → 

Gene and Drug → Gene. Up to the ten highest -scoring shortest paths are retained , outlin ing 

plausible mechanistic routes linking the gene to both disease biology and drug action .

After assembling the gene -level evidence, DrugKLM employs a n LLM to prioritize and summarize the 

most mechanistically relevant genes for each drug –disease pair. Up to ten genes are selected, and the 

model generate s concise summaries integrati ng heterogeneous evidence into a unified narrative . These 

summaries describ e how each gene contribute to disease biology and may mediate or modulate the 

drug’s therapeutic mechanism. 

Pathway -Level E vidence 

To characterize pathway -level mechanisms linking each drug to the disease context, DrugKLM integrates 

perturbational signatures from SigCom -LINCS L1000 chemical perturbation data with variant -aware cell 

line annotations and drug sensitivity measurements. 

For a given disease description, representative cell lines are identified from Cellosaurus, optionally 

restrict ed to those harboring specified driver variants ( e.g. , BRAF V600E for “BRAF V600E –mutated 

cutaneous melanoma ”). For each candidate drug profiled in these cell lines, LINCS -derived up - and 

down -regulated genes are combined with dose information and IC50 values from GDSC 41 to construct 

disease -relevant drug signatures . Genes are ranked reflecting both transcriptional effect size and drug 

potency (see next section ). 

The top 200 up -regulated and top 200 down -regulated genes are submitted to Enrichr 42 for gene set 

enrichment analysis . The resulting enriched pathways and functional annotations, together with their 

directionality (up - or down -regulated ), constitute the pathway -level evidence used to assess mechanistic 

coherence for each drug –disease pair. 

Construction of Drug -Specific Gene Signatures 

For each drug, gene -level perturbation evidence was obtained from the LINCS L1000 chemical 

perturbation dataset. Each LINCS signature includes dose, direction of regulation (up or down), and drug 

sensitivity metrics (IC50). To construct a per -drug transcriptional signature, we compute a weighted 

score for each gene by combining dose -dependent expression changes with IC50 -based potency. 

For each LINCS signature, we compute an IC50 weight and a dose weight . The IC50 weight is defined as :

𝑤 IC50 = 𝑚𝑖𝑛 ( 1

𝐼𝐶 50 , 1.0)20 

so that more potent drugs (lower IC50) receive higher weight, with a cap at 1.0 . Dose values are 

converted to micromolar units and mapped to dose weight :

𝑤 Dose = 𝑒 −𝑘 ⋅ln (1+Dose )

with  𝑘 = 0.5 by default. 

For each gene  𝑔 , we aggregate evidence across all LINCS signatures for that drug . Let  𝑈 𝑔  and  𝐷 𝑔  denote 

the sets of signatures in which  𝑔  is up - or down -regulated , respectively. We compute :

IC50Score 𝑔 = ∑ 𝑤 𝐼𝐶 50 ,𝑖 𝑖 ∈𝑈 𝑔 − ∑ 𝑤 𝐼𝐶 50 ,𝑗 𝑗 ∈𝐷 𝑔 

|𝑈 𝑔 | + |𝐷 𝑔 | , DoseScore 𝑔 = ∑ 𝑤 𝐷𝑜𝑠𝑒 ,𝑖 𝑖 ∈𝑈 𝑔 − ∑ 𝑤 𝐷𝑜𝑠𝑒 ,𝑗 𝑗 ∈𝐷 𝑔 

|𝑈 𝑔 | + |𝐷 𝑔 |

Both scores are normalized to  [−1,1], and a composite score is computed: 

FinalScore 𝑔 = 𝛼 ⋅ DoseScore 𝑔 ,norm + (1 − 𝛼 ) ⋅ IC50Score 𝑔 ,norm 

with default weight  𝛼 = 0.2. Genes with  FinalScore 𝑔 > 0 are classified as up -regulated and those with 

FinalScore 𝑔 > 0 as down -regulated. The top 200 genes in each direction , ranked by |𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑔 |, are 

retained as the drug -specific up - and down -regulated gene sets used in downstream analyses. 

Chain -of -Thought Reasoning 

Given drug -, gene -, and pathway -level evidence, DrugKLM incorporate s a chain -of -thought (CoT) 

reasoning proce dure to improve interpretability and mitigate hallucination risks. 

The LLM is instructed to evaluate each candidate drug –disease pair using evidence derived from the 

knowledge graph and biomedical literature. The CoT procedure consists of three steps: 

1.  Supporting evidence summary: Summarizes retrieved evidence (literature snippets , FDA labeling 

excerpts where available, and knowledge graph paths ) to assess therapeutic relevance. 

2.  Risk and limitation analysis : Identifies potential concerns – such as toxicity, off -target effects, limited 

specificity, or conflicting evidence – based on the collected evidence. 

3.  Confidence scoring : Assigns a confidence score in  [0, 1] based on the integrated reasoning context. 

This score reflects the overall strength of the repurposing hypothesis and supports expert triage and 

prioritization. 

Survival -Based Estimation of Drug –Disease Hazard Ratios 

To evaluate whether drug -associated transcriptional signatures are linked to patient survival, we 

estimated hazard ratios (HRs) for drug –disease pairs using TCGA gene expression and clinical survival 

data. Th is analysis does not assume that TCGA patient s received the evaluated drugs. Instead, it tests 

whether the biological activity represented by a drug’s LINCS -derived perturbational signature is 

directionally associated with overall survival within each cancer type. 

Computation of Enrichment Scores in TCGA Samples 

To quantify the similarity between each TCGA tumor and each drug’s perturbational signature, we 

applied single -sample gene set enrichment analysis (ss GSEA )43 to the TCGA expression matrix. For e ach 21 

drug and patient sample, ssGSEA generated enrichment score (ES) and its normalized enrichment score s

(NES) for both the up -regulated and down -regulated gene sets. 

Stratification of TCGA Patients 

For each drug -disease pair , patients were stratified into High and Low groups based on the distribution of 

NES value s. A tertile -based approach was used: only the top and bottom one -third of samples were 

retained as the High and Low groups , respectively .

To ensure stable survival estimation, analyses were restricted to drug –disease pairs in which both groups 

contained at least 10 samples and then corresponding cancer type had at least 3 observed survival 

events. 

Survival Association and Validation 

For each eligible drug –disease, a univariable Cox proportional hazards model was fitted using a binary 

indicator (High vs . Low NES ). The resulting hazard ratio (HR) was used as the survival -associated estimate 

for downstream analyses. An HR < 1 indicates that tumors more strong ly resembl ing the drug’s signature 

are associated with improved survival, whereas HR > 1 indicates the opposite trend. 

To evaluate clinical alignment , we computed the Spearman correlation between HR values and DrugKLM 

confidence scores across evaluated TCGA cancer types. This analysis tests whether higher model -

assigned confidence is associate d with more favorable survival -linked transcriptional patterns .

ClinicalTrials.gov and PubMed –Based Drug Categorization 

To determine the clinical evidence level of each predicted drug –disease pair, DrugKLM integrates data 

from ClinicalTrials.gov and PubMed. 

For each pair, drug and disease terms are matched against locally indexed ClinicalTrials.gov intervention 

and condition records to identify relevant trial identifiers (NCT IDs). For each matched trial, metadata —

including trial phase, recruitment status, av ailability of posted results, and last update date —are 

retrieved via the ClinicalTrials.gov API. 

In parallel, PubMed is queried to identify publications associated with matched NCT identifiers, as well as 

drug - and disease - specific literature when no trials are found. 

All retrieved trial - and literature -level evidence is aggregated and provided to a GPT -based classifier, 

which assigns each drug –disease pair to one of 1 7 predefined clinical evidence stages (in Supplementary 

Table S5), ranging from FDA -approved indications and phase -specific trial outcomes to preclinical or 

insufficient evidence. 

Blinded Expert Annotation of Top -Ranked Candidates 

To assess whether model rankings corresponded to clinical evidence stage, we conducted blinded human 

curation of the top 30 drugs ranked by DrugKLM and TxGNN across five cancers (liver cancer, colon 

cancer, pancreatic cancer, melanoma, and glioblastoma). C uration was performed independently by 

clinicians and cancer researchers with formal biomedical training and experience in evaluating clinical 

and translational evidence, with at least one curator assigned per disease. Prior to annotation, curators 

partici pated in a brief guideline -based discussion to standardize interpretation of predefined evidence 22 

categories. Each drug –disease pair was classified according to the clinical evidence stage defined in 

Supplementary Table S 7. Classification was based on reported clinical and preclinical evidence derived 

from ClinicalTrials.gov records, peer -reviewed biomedical literature, and FDA approval status. Curated 

data are provided in Supplementary Table S2. 

## Code availability 

The code is freely available:  https://github.com/ncbi -nlp/DrugKLM .

## Human Ethics and Consent to Participate declarations 

not applicable 

## Acknowledgemen sts 

This research was supported by the Division of Intramural Research (DIR) of the National Library of 

Medicine (NLM), National Institutes of Health. The authors thank the generous contributions from the 

Florence D. and Irving J. Sherman MD Charitable Foundation Trust, the Reza Khatib MD Brain Tumor 

Center, the Venable Foundation, and the Leonard Attman family for funding this work. 

## References 

1. Matsumoto, N. , et al. ESCARGOT: an AI agent leveraging large language models, dynamic graph 

of thoughts, and biomedical knowledge graphs for enhanced reasoning. Bioinformatics 41 ,

btaf031 (2025). 

2. Abdullahi, T. , et al. K-paths: Reasoning over graph paths for drug repurposing and drug 

interaction prediction. in Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge 

Discovery and Data Mining V. 2 5-16 (2025). 

3. Huang, K. , et al. A foundation model for clinician -centered drug repurposing. Nature Medicine 

30 , 3601 -3613 (2024). 

4. Wu, J. , et al. DrugSim2DR: systematic prediction of drug functional similarities in the context of 

specific disease for drug repurposing. GigaScience 12 , giad104 (2023). 

5. Shao, M., Jiang, L., Meng, Z. & Xu, J. Computational drug repurposing based on a 

recommendation system and drug –drug functional pathway similarity. Molecules 27 , 1404 

(2022). 

6. He, H. , et al. Computational drug repurposing by exploiting large -scale gene expression data: 

Strategy, methods and applications. Computers in biology and medicine 155 , 106671 (2023). 

7. Kwee, I., Martinelli, A., Khayal, L.A. & Akhmedov, M. metaLINCS: an R package for meta -level 

analysis of LINCS L1000 drug signatures using stratified connectivity mapping. Bioinformatics 

Advances 2, vbac064 (2022). 

8. Nunes, S., Badreddine, S. & Pesquita, C. Rewarding explainability in drug repurposing with 

knowledge graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.02276 (2025). 

9. Labrak, Y. , et al. Biomistral: A collection of open -source pretrained large language models for 

medical domains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10373 (2024). 23 

10. Wang, Z.P. , et al. Drug repurposing for Alzheimer’s disease using a graph -of -thoughts based large 

language model to infer drug -disease relationships in a comprehensive knowledge graph. 

BioData Mining 18 , 51 (2025). 

11. Huang, L. -C. , et al. DrugReX: an explainable drug repurposing system powered by large language 

models and literature -based knowledge graph. Research Square , rs. 3. rs -6728958 (2025). 

12. Safaei, A.A., Saboori, P., Ramezani, R. & Nematbakhsh, M. KGLM -QA: A Novel Approach for 

Knowledge Graph -Enhanced Large Language Models for Question Answering. in 2024 15th 

International Conference on Information and Knowledge Technology (IKT) 234 -240 (IEEE, 2024). 

13. Liu, S. , et al. Drugagent: Automating ai -aided drug discovery programming through llm multi -

agent collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15692 (2024). 

14. Zhang, F., Zhao, Y., Zhang, W. & Lai, L. BioScientist Agent: Designing LLM -Biomedical Agents with 

KG -Augmented RL Reasoning Modules for Drug Repurposing and Mechanistic of Action 

Elucidation. bioRxiv , 2025.2008. 2008.669291 (2025). 

15. Wei, J. , et al. DrugReAlign: a multisource prompt framework for drug repurposing based on large 

language models. BMC biology 22 , 226 (2024). 

16. Gao, S. , et al. TxAgent: An AI agent for therapeutic reasoning across a universe of tools. arXiv 

preprint arXiv:2503.10970 (2025). 

17. Linehan, W.M. & Ricketts, C.J. The Cancer Genome Atlas of renal cell carcinoma: findings and 

clinical implications. Nature Reviews Urology 16 , 539 -552 (2019). 

18. Zarin, D.A., Tse, T., Williams, R.J., Califf, R.M. & Ide, N.C. The ClinicalTrials. gov results database —

update and key issues. New England Journal of Medicine 364 , 852 -860 (2011). 

19. Zhang, Z., Cai, J., Zhang, Y. & Wang, J. Learning hierarchy -aware knowledge graph embeddings 

for link prediction. in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , Vol. 34 3065 -

3072 (2020). 

20. Chandak, P., Huang, K. & Zitnik, M. Building a knowledge graph to enable precision medicine. 

Scientific Data 10 , 67 (2023). 

21. Davis, A.P. , et al. Comparative toxicogenomics database’s 20th anniversary: update 2025. Nucleic 

acids research 53 , D1328 -D1334 (2025). 

22. Wei, C. -H. , et al. PubTator 3.0: an AI -powered literature resource for unlocking biomedical 

knowledge. Nucleic Acids Research 52 , W540 -W546 (2024). 

23. Evangelista, J.E. , et al. SigCom LINCS: data and metadata search engine for a million gene 

expression signatures. Nucleic acids research 50 , W697 -W709 (2022). 

24. Iorio, F. , et al. A landscape of pharmacogenomic interactions in cancer. Cell 166 , 740 -754 (2016). 

25. Zhou, H. , et al. MEDICASCY: a machine learning approach for predicting small -molecule drug side 

effects, indications, efficacy, and modes of action. Molecular pharmaceutics 17 , 1558 -1574 

(2020). 

26. Himmelstein, D.S. , et al. Systematic integration of biomedical knowledge prioritizes drugs for 

repurposing. elife 6, e26726 (2017). 

27. Rapisuwon, S. , et al. Systemic therapy for mucosal, acral, and uveal melanoma. in Cutaneous 

Melanoma 1301 -1335 (Springer, 2020). 

28. Grasso, C.S. , et al. Conserved interferon -γ signaling drives clinical response to immune 

checkpoint blockade therapy in melanoma. Cancer cell 38 , 500 -515. e503 (2020). 

29. Griss, J. , et al. B cells sustain inflammation and predict response to immune checkpoint blockade 

in human melanoma. Nature communications 10 , 4186 (2019). 

30. Birth, D., Kao, W. -C. & Hunte, C. Structural analysis of atovaquone -inhibited cytochrome bc 1 

complex reveals the molecular basis of antimalarial drug action. Nature communications 5, 4029 

(2014). 24 

31. Lee, J.S. , et al. Synthetic lethality -mediated precision oncology via the tumor transcriptome. Cell 

184 , 2487 -2502. e2413 (2021). 

32. Riaz, N. , et al. Tumor and microenvironment evolution during immunotherapy with nivolumab. 

Cell 171 , 934 -949. e916 (2017). 

33. Hugo, W. , et al. Genomic and transcriptomic features of response to anti -PD -1 therapy in 

metastatic melanoma. Cell 165 , 35 -44 (2016). 

34. Rooney, M.S., Shukla, S.A., Wu, C.J., Getz, G. & Hacohen, N. Molecular and genetic properties of 

tumors associated with local immune cytolytic activity. Cell 160 , 48 -61 (2015). 

35. Abdullahi, T. , et al. K-paths: Reasoning over graph paths for drug repurposing and drug 

interaction prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13344 (2025). 

36. Dong, X. , et al. Personalized prediction of anticancer potential of non -oncology drugs through 

learning from genome derived molecular pathways. NPJ Precision Oncology 9, 36 (2025). 

37. Song, H., Bang, D., Koo, B., Kim, S. & Lee, S. LLM -Integrated Representative Path Selection for 

Context -Aware Drug Repurposing on Biomedical Knowledge Graphs. in NeurIPS 2025 2nd 

Workshop on Multi -modal Foundation Models and Large Language Models for Life Sciences .

38. More, V. , et al. TheraMind: A Multi -LLM Agent for Accelerating Drug Repurposing in Lung Cancer 

via Case Report Mining. (2025). 

39. Jin, Q. , et al. Medcpt: Contrastive pre -trained transformers with large -scale pubmed search logs 

for zero -shot biomedical information retrieval. Bioinformatics 39 , btad651 (2023). 

40. Cannon, M. , et al. DGIdb 5.0: rebuilding the drug –gene interaction database for precision 

medicine and drug discovery platforms. Nucleic acids research 52 , D1227 -D1235 (2024). 

41. Yang, W. , et al. Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC): a resource for therapeutic 

biomarker discovery in cancer cells. Nucleic acids research 41 , D955 -D961 (2012). 

42. Kuleshov, M.V. , et al. Enrichr: a comprehensive gene set enrichment analysis web server 2016 

update. Nucleic acids research 44 , W90 -W97 (2016). 

43. Barbie, D.A. , et al. Systematic RNA interference reveals that oncogenic KRAS -driven cancers 

require TBK1. Nature 462 , 108 -112 (2009). 25 

# Supplementary materials :

Fig. S1 Relevance scoring of TxGNN using TCGA survival outcomes and ClinicalTrials.gov trial statuses . (a) 

Correlation between TxGNN confidence scores and TCGA dataset survival relevance across drug –disease 

pairs. Each point represents one disease -drug pair, with the fitted line indicating the overall trend. (b) 

Correlation between TxGNN confidence scores and ClinicalTrials.gov trial relevance score .

Clinical Vali dation of DrugKLM Scores: Trial -Aligned Signal 

In addition to the c linical validation on TCGA patient survival data, w e further evaluated whether 

DrugKLM confidence scores align with clinical evidence by analyzing drug –disease pairs recorded in 

ClinicalTrials.gov. An LLM -based AI reviewer, guided by a scoring prompt (Fig. S4) that was reviewed by a 

cancer biologist , assessed mechanistic rationale, preclinical evidence, early clinical signals, class -level 

validation, PK/PD suitability, safety and tolerability, trial design quality, and the importance of the target 

drug within the study. Fig. S1a illustrates the relationship between the DrugKLM confidence score and 

the clinical relevance score across all evaluated drug -disease pairs with at least one associated clinical 

trial study . Each dot represents an individual pair, and the positive correlation demonstrates that higher 

DrugKLM scores correspond to higher clinical relevance. DrugKLM ’s confidence scores showed a strong 

and statistically significant overall correlation with the independently generated clinical relevance score 

(r = 0.512, p = 5.099 × 10 ⁻²¹⁸ , shown in Fig. S2a ). Under the same analysis, TxGNN also exhibited a 

statistically significant but substantially weaker association (r = 0.276, p = 1.887 × 10 ⁻²⁸ , shown in Fig. 

S1 b). Although this trial -text –based evaluation serves as an auxiliary validation, the findings are 

consistent with the TCGA survival analysis and further support the clinical relevance of DrugKLM . The 

confidence score is intended as an ordinal prioritization signal. It is generated under a fixed scoring 

rubric, which naturally produces semi -discrete values and is appropriate for rank -based evaluation. Fig. 

S2b presents the corresponding comparison using clinical relevance scores derived from AI -reviewed 

ClinicalTrials.gov studies. Here, pairs with greater clinical relevance again show stronger alignment with 

the DrugKLM axis. Taken together, these distributions show that DrugKLM more closely tracks both Hazard Ratio (HR)            

> TxGNN  confidence  score
> (a) TxGNN Spearman correlation on TCGA dataset
> r=0. 037 ,p= 0. 7863
> Clinical trial relevant score
> TxGNN  confidence  score
> (b) TxGNN Spearman correlation on ClinicalTrial.gov
> r=0. 27 6,p=1.887 ×10 -28

26 

observational and interventional clinical evidence, indicating a stronger capacity to prioritize drug 

candidates with therapeutic potential. As shown in Fig. S2c, removal of any single evidence source 

resulted in a consistent reduction in alignment with ClinicalTrials.gov clinical -trial evidence. This trend is 

consistent with the TCGA survival outcomes. 

Fig. S 2. Clinical validation of DrugKLM using ClinicalTrials.gov evidence. (a) Relevance between DrugKLM 

confidence scores and clinical relevance scores generated by an automated AI reviewer analyzing 

ClinicalTrials.gov trials. Each point represents a drug –disease pair with at least one associated clinical 

trial. Higher DrugKLM scores correspond to higher clinical relevance. ( b) Direct comparison of DrugKLM 

and TxGNN confidence scores for drug –disease pairs. Dots are colored by clinical relevance. Pairs with 

higher clinical relevance cluster more strongly along the DrugKLM axis, indicating closer alignment wi th 

interventional clinical evidence. (c) Leave -one -evidence -out ablation analysis evaluating alignment with 

ClinicalTrials.gov evidence. Removal of any single evidence source reduces the Spearman correlation. 

You are evaluating whether [Drug] is a promising repurposing candidate for [Disease] 

based on the evidence provided in the Input section. 

This is a FIXED HEURISTIC RULE -BASED BASELINE. 

Do NOT perform reasoning, interpretation, or explanation. (b)         

> Clinical trial relevant score
> KG ×LM confidence score
> DrugKLM Spearman correlation on ClinicalTrials.gov
> r= 0.512, p = 5.099 ×10 ⁻218
> Comparison: DrugKLM vs TxGNN on ClinicalTrial.gov
> TxGNN confidence score
> KG ×LM confidence score
> Clinical relevance score

p-value Spearman r 

5.10E -218 0.512 DrugKLM 

5.15E -201 0.498 DrugKLM w/o Drug Evidence 

2.64E -197 0.500 DrugKLM w/o Gene Evidence 

9.91E -203 0.506 DrugKLM w/o Pathway Evidence 

6.68E -188 0.319 DrugKLM w/o CoT (using heuristic rule for scoring)   

> (a)
> (c) Leave -one -evidence -out ablation analysis on ClinicalTrial.gov 27

Input Evidence: 

1) Disease –Drug Evidence 

2) Aggregated Disease –Gene and Drug –Gene Evidence 

3) GSEA pathway evidence 

4) Case JSON for disease context 

[subtype_statements] 

Scoring Rules (apply independently): 

Disease –Drug evidence: 

- If direct disease –drug evidence is supported by clinical trial reports 

or FDA -approved indications → add 40 points. 

- If disease –drug evidence is indirect or preclinical only 

(e.g., cell line or animal studies) → add 20 points. 

Gene -level evidence: 

- If multiple disease -relevant genes with known mechanistic links 

are supported by literature or KG evidence → add 30 points. 

- If limited or indirect gene -level associations are present → add 15 points. 

GSEA pathway evidence: 

- If statistically significant disease -relevant pathways 

(e.g., FDR < 0.05) are identified → add 20 points. 

- If pathways are nominally significant or generic → add 10 points. 

FDA approval: 

- If FDA approval exists for any indication → add 10 points. 

Constraints: 

- Apply rules exactly as written.s 

- Do NOT modify weights. 

- Do NOT reconcile conflicting evidence. 

- Do NOT perform mechanistic or clinical reasoning. 

After scoring: 

- Cap overall_confidence_score at 100. 

- Map the score to confidence levels using predefined ranges. 

Output Constraints: 

- Populate the required JSON fields only. 

- rationale_bullets MUST list ONLY rule triggers (no explanation). 

Output: 

Return ONLY the following JSON structure: 28 

{

"Disease": "[Disease]", 

"Drug": "[Drug]", 

"verdict": { 

"overall_confidence_level": "Very High|High|Moderately High|Moderate|Moderately 

Low|Low|Very Low", 

"subtype_confidence_level": "Very High|High|Moderately High|Moderate|Moderately 

Low|Low|Very Low|N/A", 

"subtype": "[subtypes]||N/A", 

"risk_level": "Very High|High|Moderately High|Moderate|Moderately Low|Low|Very 

Low", 

"overall_confidence_score": [0 -100], 

"subtype_confidence_score": [0 -100], 

"risk_score": [0 -100], 

"FDA_status": "FDA -approved for [Disease]|FDA -approved for other indications but not for 

[Disease]|N/A" 

}, 

"rationale_bullets": [ 

"Rule triggered: Disease –Drug evidence (+40).", 

"Rule triggered: Gene -level evidence (+30)." 

]

}

Input: 

Case JSON: 

[JSON_Input] 

Evidence Payload: 

[input] 

Fig. S3. Prompt design for a non -CoT baseline that applies a structured, domain -informed 

evaluation. 

> You are an expert clinical reviewer specializing in translational oncology, immunotherapy, and early -
> phase drug development.
> Your task is to analyze the clinical trial study provided at the end of this prompt (after the keyword
> INPUT:) and produce a structured JSON output.
> The goal is to evaluate the scientific confidence of the investigational drug: "[Drug]" against the
> disease: "[Disease]" based on defined criteria.
> The analysis must follow these rules:
> 1. Output must be valid JSON.

29 

2. Each score must be between 0 and 100. 

3. All reasoning must be grounded in: 

* The provided study information 

* Established scientific knowledge of oncology drug development 

4. Do not use bullets or symbols that are not on a standard keyboard. 

5. Include both: 

a) a detailed explanation for each scoring category 

b) the numeric score 

6. Use the evaluation features and importance levels listed below. 

---

EVALUATION FEATURES AND THEIR IMPORTANCE 

Mechanistic rationale (Importance: Highest) 

* How strongly the drug mechanism links to the disease biology. 

* Whether the target is known to be relevant. 

* Whether similar mechanisms have proven successful. 

Preclinical evidence (Importance: High) 

* Strength of in vitro and in vivo activity. 

* Predictiveness of models used. 

* Dose response and translational validity. 

Early clinical signals (Importance: Highest) 

* Evidence directly from this study or similar patients, including objective responses, duration, 

pharmacodynamic activity, or any other measurable antitumor effect. 

* If the trial is Phase I or Phase II, has enrolled patients, more than two years have passed since 

primary completion, and no study results, publications, abstracts, or press releases are available, the 

clinical evidence should be interpreted as weak. 

* If a study remains Not Yet Recruiting without enrollment, it provides no clinical evidence, and 

confidence is low because no human data are available. 

Class validation (Importance: High) 

* Whether other drugs with the same target/pathway are validated. 

* External evidence from approved or late -stage agents. 

PK/PD suitability (Importance: Medium) 

* Exposure, half -life, receptor occupancy, drug distribution. 

* Whether [Drug] reaches and maintains levels needed for activity. 

Safety and tolerability (Importance: Medium) 30 

* Expected toxicities based on mechanism. 

* DLTs, immune -related AEs, combinational toxicity patterns. 

Trial design quality (Importance: Low -medium) 

* Whether the study design allows meaningful signal detection. 

* Strength of endpoints and inclusion criteria. 

Manufacturing readiness (Importance: Low) 

* Whether [Drug] has known stability, scalability, CMC feasibility. 

Competitive landscape (Importance: Lowest) 

* Availability of alternative therapies. 

* Whether unmet need influences value but not biological confidence. 

Target drug importance (Importance: High) 

* Indicates how central the [Drug] is to the study outcome. 

* Higher scores mean the [Drug] is the primary experimental agent and the results are directly 

informative for evaluating it. 

* Lower scores apply when the [Drug] is only a combination partner, background therapy, or part of a 

control arm, making its individual contribution unclear. 

Result status scoring rules (Importance: High) 

* bad: 0 to 19. Study has available negative or non -efficacious results. 

* completed_no_result: 20 to 34. The study is marked Completed for more than 12 months with no 

posted results. 

* ongoing_long_term_incomplete: 35 to 49. If the study has no posted results AND exceeds normal 

development timelines, it MUST be classified as long_term_incomplete (35 –49) even if it is still listed 

as Recruiting or Active. 

"this_year -start_year":2+ for Phase I/II 

"this_year -start_year":5+ for Phase III 

* ongoing_in_reasonable_term: 50 to 79. Only if none of the above apply  →

ongoing_in_reasonable_term (50 –79). 

"this_year -start_year":<2 for Phase I/II 

"this_year -start_year ":<5 for Phase III 

* good: 80 to 100. Study has available positive or clinically meaningful results. 

---

SCORING GUIDELINES (0 -100) 

* 0 to 20: Very low confidence 

* 21 to 40: Low confidence 31 

* 41 to 60: Moderate confidence 

* 61 to 80: High confidence 

* 81 to 100: Very high confidence 

---

Example output format (structure only): 

{

"study_summary": { 

"target_disease": "[Disease]", < - the variable ALWAYS refers to the user -provided 

Target_Disease 

"target_drug ": "[Drug]", < - the variable ALWAYS refers to the user -provided 

Target_Drug 

"title": "...", 

"NCTID":"...", 

"drug_for_treatment": ["..", ".."], 

"indication": ""..., 

"result_summary_sentence": "...", 

"phase": "...", 

"risk_level": "...", 

"positive_or_negative": "", 

"population_summary": "", 

"has_results": true|false, 

"sample_size": [0 -9]+, 

"start_year": [0 -9]+, 

"this_year -start_year": [0 -9]+, 

"complete year": [0 -9]+ 

}, 

"scoring": { 

"mechanism": { 

"score": 0 -100, 

"explanation": "" 

}, 

"clinical_evidence": { 

"score": 0 -100, 

"explanation": "" 

}, 

"safety_predictability": { 

"score": 0 -100, 

"explanation": "" 

}, 

"trial_quality": { 

"score": 0 -100, 

"explanation": "" 

}, 

"result_status": { 

"score": 0 -100, 32 

"category": "", // "good" / "bad" / "completed_no_result" / 

"ongoing_long_term_incomplete" / "ongoing_in_reasonable_term" 

"explanation": "" 

}

"target_drug_importance": { 

"score": 0 -100, 

"role": "", // "major" / "combination_partner" / 

"background_therapy" / "control" 

"explanation": "" 

}, 

"overall_confidence": { 

"score": 0 -100, 

"explanation": "" 

}

}

}

---

TASK 

1. Read the clinical trial study from INPUT:[Input] 

2. Produce the JSON described above. 

3. The JSON must be comprehensive and self -contained. 

4. Avoid any special characters not available on a standard keyboard. 

5. When assigning overall_confidence, the model must treat the score of result_status as a major 

determinant. 

---

INPUT: 

[Input] 

Target_Disease: 

[Disease] 

Target_Drug: 

[Drug] 

Fig. S 4. Scoring prompt for automated ClinicalTrials.gov –based relevance evaluation.