Title: 2603.18293v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.18293v1

Published Time: Fri, 20 Mar 2026 00:21:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 48

Markdown Content:
1

Mechanical  cues for  totipotency and the preneural state:  embryo  and cancer  expand ing 

the frontiers of  developmental physics 

Jaime Cofre *

Laboratory of Molecular  Embryology and  Cancer, Federal University of Santa Catarina, room 

313b, Florianópolis, SC, 88040 -900, Brazil 

* Corresponding author. Laboratory of Molecular  Embryology and  Cancer, Universidade 

Federal de Santa Catarina,  sala  313b, Florianópolis, SC, 88040 -900, Brazil 

E-mail address: jaime.cofre@ufsc.br 

Abstract 

In this article , I advance  the idea  that  physics  plays a central role in  cell differentiation and 

makes  fundamental  contribution s to morphogenesis, revealing the totipoten t nature  of the 

zygote.  Totipotency  is a persistent mechanical memory that  preserves the biomechanical 

records of animal morphogenesis . I  examine the mechanical and biophysical pathways 

underlying cell differentiation in embryonic development and cancer, treating them as closely 

related biological and mechanical processes. Drawing inspiration from evolutionary history, I 

also propose a biop hysical mechanism for the emergence of the animal nervous system. By 

linking physical principles to cellular differentiation, this review posit ions mechanobiology as 

a pillar of innovation with high -impact clinical implications for diseases such as cancer. 

Keywords:  cell differentiation, d efault  state of neural  induction , developmental physics, 

embryology , totipotency. 

1.  Historical foundations of chemistry as the preferred explanatory model in embryology 2

Classical embryological models of pattern formation disregard mechanical 

morphogenesis  (Turing 1952) , focusing instead on chemical morphogenesis  (Gierer and 

Meinhardt 1972) . From my perspective, a central limitation of developmental biology has been 

the failure to seek the fundamental mechanisms of self -organization and asymmetry in the first 

animal embryo or even in basal animals . This approach has led to the consolidation of classical 

embryological models that remain largely detached from an evolutionary understanding of 

early animal phylogeny  (Wolpert 1969, 1971) . Nevertheless, I identified points of convergence 

between chemical models and mechanical morphogenesis. Alan Turing believed that 

morphogens  require the specification of  only two states, a  novel  state and a default state  (Turing 

1952) . Chemical models consider short -range activators and long -range inhibitors  (Turing 

1952; Gierer and Meinhardt 1972) . Mechanical phenomena  generate  long -range tensile forces 

(Serra -Picamal et al. 2012)  and compositional effects  on the  extracellular matrix (ECM)  that 

alter the  diffusion coefficients of  bone morphogenetic protein ( BMP ) (Sedlmeier and Sleeman 

2017) , resembling short -range activators.  Furthermore, small random molecular fluctuations 

may locally increase activator concentration  (Gierer and Meinhardt 1972) . Mechanical waves 

and tissue -level textural fluctuations fit perfectly within  the  expectation s of  the chemical model 

of morphogens  (Turing 1952) . Thus,  I propose that a physical approach to the embryonic 

development of basal animals will, in the near future, provide significant advances in 

developmental biology. 

I would also like to make an initial reflection  on Turing's original formulation of the 

chemical bases of morphogenesis, in which he stated that he intended to focus on "cases where 

the mechanical aspect can be ignored and the chemical aspect is the most significant"  (Turing 

1952) . It is very difficult to find embryological  (Zhang et al. 2011; Tlili et al. 2019)  or cancer -

related  (Hirway et al. 2021)  phenomena  where mechanical aspects can be truly ignored. For 3

instance, the striking parallels between human gastrulation and cancer are well recognized, 

both of which begin with the disruption of the basal lamina. At the time of Turing's work, the 

focus on genes as the explanatory factor of morphogenesis was justifi ed by the challenges and 

limitations of the period . Genes  were understood as  carriers of biological information. Today, 

however, we have a growing theoretical and experimental foundation of the physics of 

embryonic development, revealing the basis of  totipotency  (Hove et al. 2003; Nowlan et al. 

2008; Adamo et al. 2009; North et al. 2009; Dado et al. 2012; Tajik et al. 2016; Vining and 

Mooney 2017; Engstrom et al. 2018; Nelson 2022; Wang et al. 2023; Nelson et al. 2024; Prado -

Mantilla et al. 2025) . This body of knowledge  has helped  us  to  understand that physical forces 

themselves are universal and do not evolv e. T he biological structures that generate or transmit 

those forces may change , but the underlying physical mechanisms remain unchanged . Chordin 

and collagen IV regulating BMPs have the same effect on nervous system induction. Physical 

phenomena are modular, context -specific in their  interactions within  the  embryo, 

environmentally  modifiable, and absolutely determinant  in the evolution of  anima l forms  and 

cell  differentiation  processes  (Cofre 2025) .

The intricate relationship between oncology and  embryology is indisputable  (Whitney 

1901; Krebs 1947; Coggin and Anderson 1974; Pierce 1983) , and cellular differentiation acts 

as the main point of convergence between the two fields  (Markert 1968; Pierce and Johnson 

1971) . Consistent with this idea, Garry B. Pierce developed a concept of cancer grounded in 

embryological and oncological principles  (Pierce and Wallace 1971) . Pierce's concept of 

cancer anticipated a predictive value for embryogenesis  (Pierce and Speers 1988) . That is, his 

original idea was the starting point for recognizing that cancer and embryo are part of an 

inseparable process  (Pierce and Wallace 1971; Pierce 1983; Arechaga 2003) , like two sides of 

the same coin  (Cofre and Saalfeld 2023) , as well as for understanding the embryo as a 

differentiated benign tumor  (Cofre 2024) . Therefore, it is not possible to discuss embryonic 4

cell differentiation without validating it within the field of oncology, and vice versa .

Surprisingly, both cancer  (Paszek and Weaver 2004; Paszek et al. 2005; DuFort et al. 2011) 

and embryo genesis  (gastrulation in particular)  (Brunet et al. 2013; Mitrossilis et al. 2017; 

Pukhlyakova et al. 2018; Bailles et al. 2019)  can be triggered by mechanical forces and physical 

phenomena.  Thus, the discussion on cancer presented in this article is essential for establishing 

a counterpoint between these closely related processes. Additionally, it is necessary to clarify 

the implications of developmental physics (a field not yet fully consoli dated) for 

embryogenesis and to highlight recent efforts to translate mechanobiological insights into 

therapeutic strategies and clinical trials, an approach that Pierce himself referred to as 

differentiation therapy  (Pierce and Speers 1988) .

In what follows, we will broadly discuss how the physics of the morphogenetic 

construction of the embryo is responsible for revealing the totipotency of the zygote. 

2. Differentiation:  cues for  biophysical and mechanical process es  in embryology 

Thinking about cell differentiation from a physics perspective allows us to understand 

that morphogenetic changes occur simultaneously with cell differentiation during 

embryogenesis. Therefore, the type of organization and embryonic construction has a dire ct 

impact on differentiation. What evidence is there that the transmission of an extrinsic force can 

influence gene expression? A good example of this influence is found in the linker of 

nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton (LINC) complex, which comprises nespr ins and Sad1/UNC -

84 (SUN) proteins. LINC connects the nucleus to the cytoskeleton and plays a key role in the 

regulation of mechanical force transduction, which has been shown to have significant effects 

on global transcriptional regulation  (Alam et al. 2016) . Human adipose -derived stem cells 

cultured in hydrogels with stiffness gradients ranging from 0.5 to 8.2 kPa/mm showed stiffness -5

dependent expression of YAP, lamin A/C, lamin B, MRTF -A, and MRTF -B (Hadden et al. 

2017) . This effect was even more pronounced in human mesenchymal stem cells grown on 

rigid matrices, which exhibited extensive chromatin remodeling, including increased histone 

acetyltransferase activity, reduced histone deacetylase activity, and preserved integr ity of the 

LINC complex  (Killaars et al. 2019, 2020) . On the other hand , mechanical tension can induce 

transcriptional repression and drive a switch in histone modification patterns  in  constitutive 

heterochromatin, from dimethylation of lysine 9 in histone H3 (H3K9me2/3) to trimethylation 

of lysine 27 in histone H3 (H3K27me3). This process is mediated by polycomb repressive 

complex 2 (PRC2), emerin, and non -muscle myosin IIA  (Le et al. 2016) .

Nuclear lamins provide another example of how external signals are transmitted to the 

nucleus, regulating transcription and functioning as mechanotransducers. The nuclear lamina 

of mammals is composed of intermediate filament proteins, including A/C - and B -type lamins, 

which are the primary determinants of nuclear rigidity. These lamins interact both directly and 

indirectly, via chromatin -binding adapter proteins, with specific genomic regions known as 

lamina -associated domains. Through these interactions,  lamins play critical roles in chromatin 

organization, gene expression regulation, and the modulation of mechanosensitive 

transcription factors, such as NF -κB , a key mediator of immune function, inflammation, and 

cancer  (Lammerding et al. 2004; Lund et al. 2013; Gruenbaum and Foisner 2015; Gesson et al. 

2016) .

A decade ago, Tajik et al.  (2016)  traced the full chain of mechanotransduction events 

from the cell surface to the nucleus, demonstrating that local tensions applied to integrins 

propagate through the strained actin cytoskeleton to the LINC complex, and from there through 

lamina –chromatin  interactions to stretch chromatin and upregulate transcription.  In fact, the 

mechanical forces transmitted from cell adhesions to the nucleus result in chromatin 

"stretching" within seconds of force application  (Sun et al. 2020) . Lamina -associated 6

polypeptide 2β ( LAP2β ) has been implicated in transmitting forces from the nuclear lamina to 

chromatin, representing a mechanical force -induced mechanism of gene regulation  (Sun et al. 

2023) . Further evidence comes from research by Emma  Carley and  colleagues,  who 

demonstrated that the LINC complex regulates epidermal differentiation in vitro and in vivo. 

The authors showed that integrin -generated tension is communicated through the LINC 

complex to the nuclear lamina, preserving the progenitor state of basal ker atinocytes. This 

finding suggests a direct mechanism by which mechanical signals can regulate cell 

differentiation  (Carley et al. 2021) .

Numerous  studies with stem cells  have demonstrated that the nanostructured morphology 

of the cell surface is a key factor promoting neurogenesis. For example, highly spiked surface 

moieties are particularly effective in inducing neuronal differentiation  (Poudineh et al. 2018) .

Substrate geometry and dimensions (topography) also appear to influence whether stem cells 

differentiate into neurons or glial cells  (Ankam et al. 2013) . Other studies have shown that cell 

shape, cytoskeletal tension, and RhoA signaling proteins are critical determinants of human 

mesenchymal stem cell (hMSC) differentiation into adipocytes or osteoblasts  (McBeath et al. 

2004) . Remarkably, remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton can transduce mechanical stimuli that 

promote muscle cell differentiation through RhoA/ROCK signaling  (Huang et al. 2012) .

Furthermore, hMSCs subjected to functional blockade of vinculin fail to express  myoblast 

determination protein 1 (MyoD), whereas expression of Runt -related transcription factor 2 

(RUNX2), a key regulator of osteoblast differentiation, is stimulated, indicating that adhesion 

proteins sensitive to mechanical forces can directly influenc e the fate of  stem cell s (Holle et al. 

2013) . What is clear from all these findings, which strongly suggest a role  of  mechanics in cell 

differentiation, is the need to explore these mechanical phenomena in an embryonic context in 

vivo. 7

Understanding  the factors  that direct germ layer organization during  embryogenesis  is 

one of the main goals of developmental biology.  In a study using atomic force microscopy to 

quantify the adhesive and mechanical properties of the ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm in 

zebrafish progenitor cells, Michael Krieg showed that the differential tension of the 

actomyosin -dependent cellular cort ex (regulated by Nodal/TGF -β signaling) constitutes a key 

factor in germ layer organization during gastrulation  (Krieg et al. 2008) . More recently, it was 

found that the initial length of somites in zebrafish depends on a single mechanical property of 

the paraxial mesoderm: its surface tension  (Naganathan et al. 2022) . The formation of body 

segments in vertebrate embryos has long been attributed to the spatiotemporal pattern of 

chemical molecular signals  (Cooke and Zeeman 1976; Palmeirim et al. 1997; Kawakami et al. 

2005; Vermot and Pourquié 2005) . However, we are now beginning to consolidate the 

understanding that somite length is defined by tissue mechanics  (Packard and Jacobson 1979; 

Bard 1988; Grima and Schnell 2007; Nelemans et al. 2020) .

The  pioneering  studies of Adam Engler and Dennis Discher were ahead of their time .

They demonstrated that mesenchymal stem cells, influenced by ECM elasticity and MyoII, 

commit to neural, muscular, or osteogenic lineages. Soft matrices that mimic the brain promote 

neurogenesis, slightly stiffer matrices that mimic muscle promote myogen esis, and very stiff 

matrices induce osteogenesis  (Engler et al. 2006) . Recent findings have revealed that substrate 

stiffness can directly influence the three -dimensional organization of the genome, thereby 

regulating specific gene expression programs. Rigid substrates, similar to bone tissue, induce 

chromatin condensation an d gene expression profiles associated with osteogenic differentiation 

(Na et al. 2025) . This mechanotransduction pathway, in which mechanical signals are 

transmitted to the nucleus to induce nuclear deformations and chromatin remodeling, provides 

a direct link between the physical properties of the ECM and the activation of specific 

transcrip tional programs. In my view, phenomena causing mechanical tension ultimately alter 8

cell and tissue elasticity and vice versa, resulting in the activation of mechanotransduction 

mechanisms that are directly involved in cell differentiation. 

Thus, the mechanical environment seems to be a determinant factor in regulating cell 

differentiation within the embryo. In other words, cells can sense differences in embryonic 

microenvironments and respond by differentiating into distinct cell types and tissue 

organizations  (Wang et al. 1993; Gumbiner 1996, 2005) . An important advance in our 

understanding of the mechanics of cell differentiation stems from studies assessing the 

development of the mouse epidermis  (Prado -Mantilla et al. 2025) . The formation of the skin 

barrier requires rapid proliferation along with differentiation and stratification of the embryonic 

epidermis. In the cited study, the authors demonstrated that an increase in intracellular 

actomyosin A contractility is sufficient  to trigger terminal differentiation of embryonic skin, 

providing in vivo evidence of the interdependence between cell mechanics and differentiation. 

A significant portion  of the mechanical  pathways  guiding  cell differentiation  has been 

revealed through studies of tissue contacts  and how they transmit and transform mechanical 

tension during embryogenesis.  For example, studies on tension -induced mechanotransduction 

in  Caenorhabditis elegans  demonstrated that muscle cells influence epithelial morphogenesis 

(Zhang et al. 2011) . Contacts between muscle and epithelium were proposed to occur via 

hemidesmosomes, which serve not only as anchoring structures but also as mechanosensors 

that respond to tension. These contacts initiate signaling cascades involving Rac GTPase, p21 -

activate d kinase (PAK -1), and the adaptor proteins Git -1 and PIX -1 (Zhang et al. 2011) .

Mechanical forces generated by muscle contraction (muscle strength) are also crucial for bone 

growth in mouse embryos  (Palacios et al. 1992)  and  help  initiate and propagate ossification in 

long bones of avian embryos  (Nowlan et al. 2008) . In basal animals , particularly  ctenophores ,

which have been  placed  at  the root of animal phylogeny  (Ryan et al. 2013; Moroz et al. 2014; 

Arcila et al. 2017; Shen et al. 2017; Whelan et al. 2017) , there is no direct evidence of the 9

influence of muscle cells on comb row formation. However, a connection between gonadal 

tissues and comb row formation has been suggested. Gametogenic tissues are located in the 

eight meridional canals underlying comb rows, or in their homologs or derivativ es  (Pianka 

1974) . The endodermal origin of the gonads is well established, and the organization of gonadal 

tissue allows distinguishing  the different types of  ctenophore s (Pianka 1974) .

Tissue contact and interaction, as seen in embryonic induction, represent some of the 

most fundamental processes in modern embryology  (Spemann and Mangold 1924; Gurdon 

1987; Jessell and Melton 1992; Slack 1993; Hemmati -Brivanlou and Melton 1997; Harland 

2000) . In basal animals , several  cues for  differentiation can be observed in the contacts between 

tissues during morphogenesis, following classical morphogen induction mechanisms. 

Although studies on the biophysics and mechanobiology of ctenophores are still lacking, 

understanding differentiation  in this group is crucial within the context of this article, as I will 

later propose a model for nervous system formation based on basal animals. 

It is well known that , in ctenophore embryos, micromere cells that move by epiboly 

differentiate into epidermal cells, whereas macromere cells subject to stress give rise to 

endodermal cells. The formation of comb rows requires inductive signaling between the m 1

and e 1 lineages  (Martindale and Henry 1997) . Classical inductive signals from E and M 

macromeres were described by  Henry and Martindale (2001).  Oral micromeres, on the other 

hand, migrate and undergo mesenchymal -to -epithelial transition (MET) to form muscle cells. 

If oral micromeres come into contact with the aboral epidermal surface, they differentiate into 

lithocytes of the apical organ  (Martindale and Henry 1999) . These classical inductive signals 

are well documented in ctenophores  (Farfaglio 1963; Martindale 1986; Martindale and Henry 

1996, 1997) , as are  the "embryonic fields or equivalence groups that are controlled by cell –cell 

interactions"  (Henry and Martindale 2004) .10 

In ctenophores, gastrulation generates the ectoderm through epiboly of aboral 

micromeres, whereas the endoderm forms by invagination (embolism) of macromeres that 

move inward, carrying with them a subset of micromeres into the interior of the embryo. These 

internalized micromeres, referred to as gastrular  (Farfaglio 1963)  or oral  (Martindale and Henry 

2015)  micromeres,  originate from  macromere s (Pianka 1974) . They appear on the oral side and 

are subsequently internalized during macromere invagination. Studies in  Mnemiopsis leidyi 

indicated that most oral micromeres serve as progenitors of apical organ lithocytes  (Freeman 

and Reynolds 1973)  and give rise to mesodermal musculature  (Martindale and Henry 1999) .

However, their potential contribution to endodermal derivatives cannot be excluded due to 

technical limitations  (Martindale and Henry 1999) . The  muscle cell  architecture and 

organization in  M. leidyi  is  unique, exhibiting an  aboral –oral orientation (longitudinal muscles, 

see Figure 7F in  Martindale and Henry, 1999) , aligned with the direction in which the epidermis 

is constructed.  Therefore, I speculate that mesenchymal cells harbor the niches  for  epidermis 

differentiation or , perhaps , even  for  nervous system differentiation. 

ECM rigidity, understood as textur al patterns  that arise within the embryo, constitutes 

another  decisive and crucial mechanical cue  in cell  differentiation . During gastrulation, the 

presence of ECM textural gradients may influence cell trajectories  (Loganathan et al. 2012; 

Hartman et al. 2017; Park et al. 2018; Zhu et al. 2020, 2023) . On a spatial scale, qualitative 

differences in texture (rough versus smooth) can result in differential cellular outcomes.  Under 

conditions of mechanical stress, mesenchymal stem cells commit to neural, muscular, or 

osteogenic lineages , depending directly on ECM elasticity and MyoII activity  (Engler et al. 

2006) . In agreement with Engler's findings, oral micromeres in ctenophores  can  differentiate 

into neural cells  (Jager et al. 2011) , muscle cells  (Martindale and Henry 1999) , and 

mesenchymal cells of the mesoglea  (Pang and Martindale 2008)  after migration . In 

Pleurobrachia pileus , two types of nerve networks have been described: a loosely organized 11 

network distributed throughout the mesoglea and a more compact network with polygonal 

meshes located in the ectodermal epithelium  (Jager et al. 2011) . In vertebrates  (Mongera et al. 

2019; Sambasivan and Steventon 2021; Wymeersch et al. 2021)  and ascidians  (Hudson and 

Yasuo 2021) , it is well established that certain posterior neural tissues share a common origin 

with the mesoderm, despite differences in mechanisms of specification  (Hudson and Yasuo 

2021) . Based on these observations, it seems reasonable to propose that a neuromesodermal 

lineage has been conserved since the origin of metazoans. In vertebrates, the spatiotemporal 

localization of this lineage generally coincides with the co -expression of the t ranscription 

factors brachyury/TbxT and Sox2  (Aires et al. 2018) . Brachyury  has been  characterized in 

ctenophores and cnidarians  (Yamada et al. 2007, 2010; Pukhlyakova et al. 2018) . Sox2  has 

been  identified in ctenophores  in regions of intense cell  proliferation  (Schnitzler et al. 2014; 

Moroz 2015)  and  in  neurosensory epithelia  (Jager et al. 2008) .

Considering the current state of the art in cell differentiation, I wish to offer two 

reflections. The first is that, despite the apparent reductionism of our experimental approaches 

in embryology and the seeming impossibility of fully grasping the complex ity of embryonic 

development as a whole, the most important question in developmental biology inevitably 

arises: How is embryonic robustness achieved?  (Mao and Wickström 2024) . The answer to this 

question lies in the field of physics . In  my view,  the mechanical memory embedded in the 

zygote (totipotency) may explain the robustness and coherence of tissue emergence and its 

mechanical interactions. Such knowledge will be crucial for translating advances in 

mechanobiology into practical tools for rege nerative medicine  (Cofre 2025) . I will address the 

issue of totipotency later in this article.  However, I urge caution regarding attempts to draw 

direct parallels between hydrogels of variable plasticity, gastruloids, and embryoi ds  (Davies 

2017; Shahbazi and Zernicka -Goetz 2018; van den Brink et al. 2020; Veenvliet et al. 2020; 

Wei et al. 2023; Lee et al. 2026; Hao et al. 2026)  and the  embryo in vivo.  Such comparisons 12 

are akin to equating an intriguing laboratory experiment with a phenomenon shaped by 

evolutionary and phylogenetic construction. For this reason, I have left aside analyses based 

on these embryo -like systems, although I acknowledge their value in addressin g specific 

therapeutic challenges. In this article,  I focus instead on resolving broader questions related to 

totipotency, morphogenetic fields, and persistent mechanical memory rooted in animal 

phylogeny. 

The second reflection concerns the true meaning of some concepts widely emphasized in 

the scientific literature, such as genetic programming (lineage -specific transcriptional 

programs)  (Kalukula et al. 2025) , molecular clocks  (Cooke and Zeeman 1976; Palmeirim et al. 

1997; Dubrulle and Pourquié 2002; Pourquié 2003; Andrade et al. 2007; Hubaud et al. 2017; 

Klepstad and Marcon 2023) , and  the so -called default state  (Weinstein and Hemmati -Brivanlou 

1997; Hemmati -Brivanlou and Melton 1997; Muñoz -Sanjuán and Brivanlou 2002) . Th e

following  question s arise as we seek to highlight the role of mechanobiology and its future 

impact on the innovation of therapeutic strategies based on cell differentiation.  What is the 

impact of using stem cells as platforms to study the dynamics of morphogenesis in vitro without 

considering relationships among cells within the integrated, global context of the embryo? 

What constitutes the self -organization of stem cells and  their descendants? How do the 

extremely refined curvatures and shapes of dif ferent organs emerge during animal phylogeny? 

How are human forms consistently preserved and recreated across generations ( related to 

robustness , as  addressed  in the first reflection)? Finally, the most important question in 

experimental biology: What is totipotency? In my view, all these  inquiries  can be addressed 

within the framework of persistent mechanical memory (as will be discussed later) and through 

an understanding of how physics directly influences biological phenomena. 

The following section shows that molecular signals of nervous system induction are 

conserved in invertebrates  (Gilbert 2000) . This finding supports the discussion of the 13 

possibility that the so -called default state of neural differentiation may, in fact, represent a 

persistent mechanical memory that conserves and stores the mechanical records of animal 

morphogenesis (self -organization). In the same way, the so -called genet ic programs and the 

self -organization of stem cells may be understood as consequences of tissue mechanics directly 

impacting gene expression  (Tajik et al. 2016; Vining and Mooney 2017; Carley et al. 2021; 

Sun et al. 2023) .

3.  Instead of chemical signals, mechanical records serving as persistent mechanical 

memory:  the physical foundations of nervous system differentiation 

The formation of the nervous system represents one of the most enigmatic aspects of 

ctenophore embryology, and its  possible  independent origin has generated considerable 

controversy  (Moroz et al. 2014; Marlow and Arendt 2014) . The cellular basis of the default 

theory of neural induction are well established  (Levine and Brivanlou 2007)  and disregard the 

integration of mechanical information.  Although there are proposals regarding the mechanical 

control of nervous system formation  (Franze 2013) , there remains a reluctance to speak 

explicitly and directly about mechanics in new hypotheses concerning the neural default model 

in vertebrates  (Sagha 2025) . In my opinion, incorporating elongation into the neural default 

model means integrating mechanical phenomena and anisotropic stress dependence into the 

very foundations of the theory  (Bertet et al. 2004; Kumar et al. 2006; Rauzi et al. 2008; 

Fernandez -Gonzalez et al. 2009) . At this juncture , when  genetic and chemical aspect s are 

considered predominant , it is natural to focus on identifying genes responsible for the process 

or, at the very least, to investigate whether these genes are related to nervous system formation 

in primitive animals such as ctenophores. Surprisingly, nearly all of the relevant com ponents 

are already present during early embryonic development. Tolloid and TGF -β display 14 

overlapping expression patterns, consistent with preferential epidermal induction in the aboral 

region, identified by Martindale as the tentacular bulb  (Pang et al. 2011) . BMP homologs are 

likewise detected in the aboral region, where they are associated with the apical organ  (Pang et 

al. 2011) . The nervous system exhibits a distribution pattern typical of bilaterians, characterized 

by an aboral neurosensory complex  (Jager et al. 2011) . However, genes encoding BMP 

inhibitors such as  chordin  and  follistatin  are missing  (Pang et al. 2011) , as are other  BMP and 

TGF -β inhibitor genes known to  function  in the endoderm region  (Henry et al. 1996) . When 

considering physical phenomena, what matters is not  which structure  performs the force or 

generates the tension, but rather which cellular component carries it out at any given moment 

in evolutionary history. From my point of view, the element that replaces chordin at the root 

of animal phylogeny is the ECM. However, this  proposal  implies a radical conceptual shift in 

which the geometry, textures, and autonomous forces of the ECM become fundamental to 

cellular differentiation. For this to occur, we m ust abandon the idea of morphogenesis driven 

solely by cell s and instead focus on the dynamics and autonomy of the ECM  (Loganathan et 

al. 2016; Nematbakhsh et al. 2020; Díaz -de -la -Loza and Stramer 2024) .

The first step in reinterpreting the role of the ECM was breaking free from the trap of 

purely chemical interactions and their presumed direct effects on cellular differentiation. First 

and foremost, it was essential to identify all the interactions occurr ing around the  ECM.  Several 

ECM components have been shown to bind  to  BMP. Type IIA procollagen, which contains a 

cysteine -rich propeptide, binds to TGF -β1 and BMP -2 (Zhu et al. 1999) . C ollagen IV  also  binds 

to BMP -2 (Paralkar et al. 1992)  and  decapentaplegic  (Dpp), the BMP -2/4 ortholog  in 

Drosophila melanogaster  (Wang et al. 2008) . It then became important  to  recognize  that two 

cysteine -rich domains  alone  are sufficient, rather than the entire chordin protein, for inhibit ing 

BMP  (Larrain et al. 2000) . Moreover, cysteine -rich domains in other intracellular proteins have 

been identified as one of the major innovations of unicellular holozoans  (Herman et al. 2018) ,15 

configured as  an important element in the formulation of a mechanical preneural model in an 

evolutionary context. 

But the most significant breakthrough was achieved by establishing that proteins 

containing cysteine -rich domains, such as integrins, undergo conformational changes that 

expose cryptic sites not predicted in their initial structure; therefore, the dynamics through 

which these proteins interact appear to be highly important  (Beglova et al. 2002) . The idea 

emerged  that the  proteolytic processing of  certain  proteins implicated in embryonic 

development  could reveal new biochemical activities associated with BMP inhibition  (Yu et 

al. 2000) . With this  paradigm shift , the architecture of the ECM gained fundamental 

importance , and the basement membrane was understood not merely as a site for the deposition 

of protein fragments and growth factors, but as a site of biomechanical regulation  (Kopf et al. 

2014) . In other words,  BMP growth factor signaling and its impact on epidermal, osteogenic, 

and nervous system differentiation are only possible within a biomechanical context. The ECM 

was found to behave as an active agent in developmental biology, something that, for some 

deve lopmental biologists, was extremely promising in terms of harnessing the driving force 

imparted by the embryonic environment (ECM) for future cell therapies  (Bronner -Fraser 

1982) .

Donald Ingber's  proposal of geometric control  over  cell life and death was a turning 

point in  our  understanding that cellular adhesion to micropatterned substrates is decisive for 

cell fate  (Chen et al. 1997) . Geometric foundations make sense  in the fields of  developmental 

biology  and  oncology  (Kim et al. 2020) , pointing to the idea that the real impact of 

morphogenesis is to reveal cell differentiation. Thus, stem cells appear to define their fate by 

taking advantage of nanotopography and integrin –matrix interactions  (Kim et al. 2012; Dalby 

et al. 2014) . Consistent with mechanical differentiation, chondrogenic progenitors or 

adipogenic  precursor cells, which exhibit a spherical phenotype, fail to differentiate into bone 16 

cells (osteogenic fate) when exposed to local BMP gradients  (Wang et al. 2012) . These 

observations shed light on the existence of a synergistic mechanism between chemical (BMP -

2) and mechanical signals  (Tan et al. 2014; Wei et al. 2015, 2020) . What was truly inspiring 

was the recognition of a molecular memory unit  (Wei et al. 2020) . Smad complexes remain 

bound to and active at target genes even after removal of BMP -2. In other words, the 

biomechanical impact can be measured at the level of gene transcription. There is already a 

consensus that the role of BMP as a morphogen, and its re lationship with mechanotransduction, 

is embedded in the ECM and its remodeling, all within a surprising context in which chemical 

morphogens seem to have been replaced by mechanical morphogens  (Das et al. 2019) .

In the presence of collagen IV,  BMP diffusion coefficients  decrease  from about 87 to 

0.10 μm 2 s−1 (Sedlmeier  and Sleeman 2017) , significantly limiting the range  predicted by 

chemical models based on diffusion gradients  (Turing 1952; Wolpert 1969, 1971; Rogers and 

Schier 2011) . Today, there are genuine doubts as to whether BMP ligands act as true 

morphogens. Dpp  is one of the most classically characterized morphogens in developmental 

biology. Yet, diffusion analyses in wing imaginal discs of  Drosophila  have shown only short -

range effects  (Kicheva  and González -Gaitán 2008; Ramel and Hill 2012) , consistent with 

findings  in vertebrates such as  Xenopus  and  zebrafish  (Jones et al. 1996; Nikaido et al. 1999) .

Also,  recent studies have concluded that transcytosis is not involved in Dpp transport in the 

Drosophila  wing  (Schwank et al. 2011) , confirming  its  short -range  action . Therefore,  here we 

have  a morphogen (Dpp) that does not freely diffuse but that, to achieve long -distance effects, 

could act synergistically with mechanical mechanisms in morphogenesis  (Nematbakhsh et al. 

2020; Geresu et al. 2025)  and growth  (Aegerter -Wilmsen et al. 2012; Baena -Lopez et al. 2012) 

in  the imaginal disc of  Drosophila .

The importance of mechanics in cell differentiation was consolidated by studies showing 

that, in response to compressive force, integrins bind synergistically to the BMP receptor and 17 

form a mechanoreceptor complex that mediates Smad1/5/8 phosphorylation  (Zhou et al. 2013) .

This finding  revealed  that  the initial component of the mechanism is entirely mechanical and 

involves oscillatory shear stress . Finally,  the BMP -1 receptor interacts with the integrin β1 

subunit to induce Smad1/5 signaling in response to increased substrate stiffness  (Guo et al. 

2016) , paving the way for recognition of the importance of textural gradients and anisotropic 

textures in cell differentiation  (Swift et al. 2013; Zouani et al. 2013; Shekaran et al. 2014; 

Chaudhuri et al. 2020; Sthanam et al. 2022; Alisafaei et al. 2025)  and  in  cancer  (Mott and Werb 

2004; Park et al. 2016; Ahmadzadeh et al. 2017; Glentis et al. 2017; Yan et al. 2017; Dai et al. 

2020b; Wang et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020; Naylor et al. 2022) . Based on these fundamentals, 

I consider the ECM to represent a major revolution in animal organization  (Cofre 2023) , not 

only for its possible ability to substitute chordin in ctenophores or for its mechanotransducing 

power, but mainly for its now well -established capacity to generate persistent mechanical 

memory  (Guilak et al. 2009; Balestrini et al. 2012; Yang et al. 2014; Heo et al. 2016; Li et al. 

2017; Killaars et al. 2019, 2020) . According to my hypothesis, persistent mechanical memory 

is what makes it possible to reproduce an embryo in the next generation . Furthermore, it  is 

responsible for  triggering  the emergence of totipotency  (Figure 1) . Next, based on all the 

scientific arguments described above, I will show how a mechanical model of neural default 

could arise in the first animal embryo. 

During embryogenesis, ECM networks display highly dynamic material properties that 

accommodate the large -scale deformations and forces shaping the embryo. In epithelial cancer 

cell models, tension waves are generated and propagate over long distances  (Serra -Picamal et 

al. 2012)  in the direction of migration, functioning as "morphogens"  (Morita et al. 2017; Das 

et al. 2019; Agarwal and Zaidel -Bar 2021) . In ctenophores, the nervous system is 

predominantly located in the aboral region, reflecting the effects of early patterning  (Jager et 

al. 2011) ; however, this  organization has not always been so . Ctenorhabdotus 18 

campanelliformis  possessed longitudinal axons connecting the apical organ and ciliated sulci 

(aboral) to a circumoral (oral) nerve ring  (Parry et al. 2021) . The ECM microenvironment also 

changes markedly over time and space during morphogenesis, generating fluctuations in 

textural properties  (Loganathan et al. 2012; Hartman et al. 2017; Park et al. 2018; Zhu et al. 

2020, 2023) . These textural gradients arise from the physical forces involved in the self -

organization of the first embryo . Based on these considerations, I speculate that the ECM 

sequesters BMP according to textural patterns, creating regions where  limited  diffusion  of 

BMP  induces epidermis formation  (Wilson and Hemmati -Brivanlou 1995; Zimmerman et al. 

1996)  and regions without BMP (retained within the ECM)  (Figure 2A and B)  and thereby 

allowing default formation of the nervous system  (Levine and Brivanlou 2007) . Here it is 

important to emphasize that long -range diffusion is not required; only BMP secretion is 

necessary to generate a local textural gradient near the secretory cell during ctenophore epiboly. 

In my proposal, this textural gradient, acting in synergy  with the stress waves produced by 

epiboly (from oral to aboral), would allow the induction of cell morphogenesis and 

differentiation. In line with this idea,  it has been proposed that  the polygonal network pattern 

of the nervous system would follow the t extural organization of the ECM in the absence of 

BMP -4 diffusion  (Jager et al. 2011) . This same textural pattern might have been important for 

the  induction of a neuromesodermal lineage during gastrulation. 

To develop the preneural  default model, we must imagine the first embryo and the earliest 

instance of cell differentiation in the metazoan context. In this framework, the preneural model 

is grounded in mechanics and represents the earliest manifestation of durotaxis and topotaxis ,

phenomena now well described as biophysical regulators of migration and morphogenesis 

(Engler et al. 2006; Sunyer et al. 2016; Park et al. 2018) . It is equally important to recognize 

that epiboly entails a redistribution of viscoelastic forces acting on macromeres, together with 

an opposing surface tension that pulls cells toward the oral pole, consistent with models derived 19 

from cancer research  (Pajic -Lijakovic and Milivojevic 2020, 2022) . As epiboly progresses, this 

tension increases because the number of cells expands, the cell layer enlarges  (Martindale and 

Henry 1999) , and  the  ECM is  progressively  incorporated  (Latimer and Jessen 2010) . These 

changes result in greater force exerted on the substrate and heightened tension between cells in 

the  oral region (Figure  1A).  At the same time, one can imagine a stronger viscoelastic resistive 

force acting on macromeres at the aboral pole . The model assumes that cells undergoing 

epiboly generate intense tensile forces and are capable of establishing the ECM textural 

gradient by themselves  (Figure 2A  and B ). If the thin ECM layer were removed after epiboly, 

the resulting profile would resemble that shown in Figure 2C. Such a profile reflects the tensile 

forces applied to cell surfaces (Figure  1A ), which shape larger collagen deposits at sites of 

cell –cell interactions, thereby increasing ECM rigidity (stiffening) relative to softer 

surrounding  regions  (Figure 2C). 

Following epiboly, ectodermal cells proliferate while becoming exposed to the 

established textural gradient, which contributes to the differential formation of the epidermis 

and nervous system  (Wilson and Hemmati -Brivanlou 1995) . Stress waves generated during 

epiboly propagate as morphogens  (Serra -Picamal et al. 2012) . In ctenophores, this mechanical 

polarity is partly reflected in the restricted expression of BMP homologs to the aboral region 

(Pang et al. 2011) . Within the ectoderm, BMP secretion  (Figure 2B)  generates the profile 

illustrated in Figure 2D: regions with increased stiffness, enriched collagen content, and higher 

densities of cysteine -rich domains that sequester BMP, resulting in reduced local BMP 

concentration. Cells entering these regions would  therefore initiate  epidermal  differentiatio n. 

Conversely, in regions  without  free BMP,  neural  differentiation , by default,  would be induced ,

owing to the absence of BMP receptor activation ( Figure 2E). The p olygonal configuration 

shown in Figure 2F corresponds to the organization of neural cells. 20 

This polygonal ectodermal network matches the nerve net architecture described in 

ctenophores, specifically the epithelial polygonal nerve network  (Jager et al. 2011) .

Surprisingly , a mesogleal nerve network has also been reported in ctenophores  (Jager et al. 

2011) , a finding consistent with the proposed model. As the thin ECM film and its textural 

gradient interact with two cell populations, they would also influence cells within the 

mesodermal layer, thereby promoting a neuromesodermal lineage. For readers familiar  with 

textural gradients and mesenchymal differentiation, it is worth noting that the pattern proposed 

in Figure 2 aligns with parameters known to favor osteogenic differentiation  (Engler et al. 

2006; Huebsch et al. 2010; Tse and Engler 2011; Shih et al. 2011) . The essential point is that 

cells, through epiboly, generate a textural gradient that begins to establish durotaxis and 

topotaxis. This understanding represents a significant advance in the mechanical challenges of 

embryogenesis as physical principles oper ating throughout animal phylogeny. 

Returning to my hypothesis, macromeres subjected to tensile forces during gastrulation 

would differentiate into the endodermal layer and into mesodermal components of the 

mesoglea, including a neural network. Here , I would like to emphasize that embryogenesis 

itself constructs tissue architecture and organization. If the embryonic process is not taken into 

account, totipotency will continue to be defined merely as the capacity to generate distinct cell 

types, rather  than as the outcome of the embryo's ability to build tissue architecture and 

organization during morphogenesis. From this perspective, epiboly, invagination, and other 

morphogenetic movements are directly involved in revealing totipotency. 

4.  Totipotency revealed through morphogenesis 

Defining totipotency solely as a problem of differentiation, without taking 

morphogenesis into account, appears to stem from the limitations of experimental approaches. 21 

Studying cell differentiation often involves disrupting the embryo and its organization, thereby 

losing the physical and mechanical context that shapes the process  (Discher et al. 2009) . A

clear example of the pitfalls of this approach is the widespread belief that pluripotent 

embryonic stem cells provide a unique window into mammalian development and 

differentiation in a Petri dish  (Rossant 2008) , or  that isolated embryonic stem cells can serve 

as the basis for new models of mammalian development  (Murry and Keller 2008; Young 2011) .

Whereas the ultimate goal is to control the differentiation potency of embryonic stem cells and 

steer their development along specific pathways, this strategy overlooks crucial information 

encoded in the embryonic cells themselves, such as their niches, in teractions with the ECM, 

and morphogenetic movements, which may hold the key to understanding the potency problem. 

Another frequent misconception is to attribute the morphogenetic construction of the 

embryo solely to genes  (Gehring 1996) . In vertebrates, gastrulation genes are often treated as 

central components of genetic strategies in developmental biology. Yet, when gastrulation 

occurs in the absence of these genes, driven instead by physical forces, which are rarely 

recognized as active  agents of morphogenesis  (Brunet et al. 2013; Mitrossilis et al. 2017; 

Pukhlyakova et al. 2018; Bailles et al. 2019) , our technical and theoretical limitations become 

apparent. Genes are also commonly credited with establishing differentiation potential, as 

exemplified by induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs)  (Takahashi et al. 2007) . Although the 

contributions of iPSC research to basic and applied science are undeniable, the limitations of 

these models are often overlooked, particularly with respect to differentiation protocols that 

require refining  (Ratajczak et al. 2016; Antonov and Novosadova 2021) . The links between 

reprogrammed embryonic stem  cells and cancer  are also poorly understood  (Hwang et al. 2009; 

Lin et al. 2014; Du et al. 2020; Seno et al. 2022) . Nevertheless , it is  know n that  Oct3/4  (de Jong 

and Looijenga 2006) , Sox2  (Dey et al. 2022) , Klf4  (Qi et al. 2019) , and  Myc  are linked to cancer. 22 

Accordingly , iPSCs injected intraperitoneally form teratomas, displaying pluripotent features 

(NANOG expression) consistent with their embryonic identity  (Abad et al. 2013) .

Despite our experimental limitations,  understanding how cells retain a memory of their 

mechanical history, whether lasting minutes, days, or weeks, has emerged as a crucial aspect 

of embryology. The physical and mechanical experiences that guide the successful construction 

of the first embryo  may be stably and persistently impregnated in stem cells or germ cells as 

mechanical memory, potentially allowing the process to be reconstructed in subsequent 

generations. This insight opens the possibility of integrating physical principles directly into 

the concept of totipotency. Current research continues to investigate the epigenetic mechanisms 

responsible for the formation and maintenance of this mechanical memory  (Heo et al. 2015; 

Scott et al. 2023; Cambria et al. 2024; Lee and Holle 2024) . It is well established that epigenetic 

processes contribute to the storage of mechanical memory in cells, supporting the consensus 

that mechanical forces can modify chromatin accessibility and influence transcriptional activity 

(Rao et al. 2014; Le et al. 2016; Kim et al. 2019) .

It is now recognized that long -term mechanical memory can be encoded through 

persistent epigenetic modifications  (Balestrini et al. 2012) , including histone methylation and 

acetylation, which are regulated by methylases, demethylases, histone acetyltransferases, and 

histone deacetylases, as well as DNA methylation and non -coding  RNAs  (Cambria et al. 2024) .

The most compelling evidence of these persistent epigenetic mechanisms comes from 

embryology. Polycomb group (PcG) proteins, key epigenetic modifiers, are central to genetic 

repression and play critical roles in regulating developmental genes across multip le cell types 

and tissue contexts, including embryonic and adult stem cells. Furthermore, these proteins are 

essential for cell fate transitions during embryogenesis  (Sparmann and van Loewen 2006)  and 

have specific  roles  in embryonic development,  in the functioning of  pluripotent stem cells, and 

in  the reprogramming of somatic cells to a pluripotent -like state  (Aloia et al. 2013) .23 

Histone acetylation is generally linked to chromatin opening and gene activation 

(Bannister and Kouzarides 2011) . An important exception to this rule is H3K27me3, which 

promotes gene repression  (Bracken et al. 2007; Piunti and Pasini 2011) . PRC2 -mediated 

trimethylation of H3K27 can enhance the binding affinity of local chromatin for  Polycomb 

repressive complex 1 (PRC1)  (Min et al. 2003) . When PRC1 binds to H3K27me3 marks, 

heterochromatin is formed, restricting chromatin accessibility to transcriptional complexes and 

inhibiting subsequent transcription via chromatin compaction  (Grimaud et al. 2006; 

Schuettengruber et al. 2017) . In vitro, exposure of multipotent epidermal stem/progenitor cells 

and mesenchymal stem cells to cyclic mechanical tension induced chromatin compaction and 

transcriptional repression dependent on H3K27me3  (Le et al. 2016; Heo et al. 2016) ,

phenomen a that may underlie the formation of persistent mechanical memory. Moreover, 

increasing mechanical tension resulted in the amplification of the extent and persistence of 

chromatin condensation in mesenchymal stem cells, revealing the dose -dependent nature o f

these repressive effects  (Heo et al. 2016) . Altogether, these findings suggest that embryonic 

stem cells possess mechanisms capable of establishing and maintaining long -term mechanical 

memory, a feature indispensable for the emergence of animal life. 

It was only possible for animal life to arise once all essential mechanical processes were 

fully operational in the first embryo. The earliest zygote needed to transmit the physical 

consequences of intense reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton to the nu cleus, thereby 

organizing chromatin. Cells undergoing epiboly and those adhering to the basal lamina had to 

undergo the same process to withstand the physical stresses of morphogenesis. Within a short 

time, a population of multipotent stem cells acquired t he ability to absorb and endure 

mechanical impacts throughout their ontogeny. This capability endowed stem cells with a 

biomechanical history, stored as mechanical memory within their nuclei and later used to 

reproduce the process in subsequent generations  (Figure 1B) .24 

Basal animals retain germ cells within the pool of multipotent stem cells for an extended 

period  (Juliano et al. 2010; Fierro -Constaín et al. 2017; Edgar et al. 2021) , delaying their 

segregation in a process reminiscent of cancer stem cell behavior  (Cofre 2025) . This delayed 

separation was both expected and crucial for the emergence of animal life. Multipotent stem 

cells in the first embryo required mechanical and physical stimuli from embryogenesis to 

complete germline segregation. In other words, germ cells coul d only form after being fully 

imprinted by their surrounding environment and the physical processes occurring within the 

first embryo  (Cofre and Saalfeld 2023) . Through this process, the embryo encoded the genomic 

records of its construction by generating mechanical memory  (Engler et al. 2006; Heo et al. 

2015; Dai et al. 2020)  within multipotent stem cells.  This principle applies to the first embryo, 

which created a topological map of physical forces within its genetic material  (Uhler and 

Shivashankar 2017b, a, 2018; Tsai and Crocker 2022) .

Building on the concept of mechanical memory, Denis Duboule's studies with HoxD 

genes in embryonic stem cells showed that non -transcribed genes are marked by H3K27me3 

tags, whereas active genes carry large domains of H3K4me3 tags  (Soshnikova and Duboule 

2009) . This relationship  suggests  that bimodal 3D dynamics  may  have a mechanical basis, 

considering t he H3K27me3 -dependent sensitivity to mechanical tension  (Heo et al. 2016) . It is 

also  notable  that the multidirectional interactions of  topologically associating domains ( TADs )

were retained after cohesin depletion  (Bintu et al. 2018) , further hinting at their mechanical 

underpinnings. Cohesins themselves are force -sensitive  (Kim et al. 2019; Pobegalov et al. 

2023)  and  play critical roles  in the pairing of sister chromatids during mitosis  (Strunnikov et 

al. 1993; Guacci et al. 1997; Michaelis et al. 1997; Srinivasan et al. 2018) , as well as  in loop 

extrusion  (Richeldi et al. 2024; Golovand Gavrilov 2024)  after cytokinesis.  Chromatin features, 

including higher -order organization (e.g., TADs and Polycomb domains) and frequent 

cooperative interactions, have drawn significant attention as emergent properties  (Bintu et al. 25 

2018; Almassalha et al. 2025) , a  form of  developmental memory  (Noordermereer et al. 2014) ,

or  even as  a reinforcement learning system  (Almassalha et al. 2025) . Taken together, these 

observations indicate that  the structural organization of chromatin is imbued with  long -term 

persistence, and that chromatin dynamics provide a foundational framework for beginning to 

explain totipotency. 

5. Concluding remarks and perspectives 

At present , from the perspective of  the  history of science , it is essential to recognize and 

test the mechanical component of totipotency, as this could have profound implications for 

both cancer therapy and our understanding of animal evolution from a physics standpoint. 

Today, it is possible to quantitatively tes t the hypothesis that totipotency involves mechanical 

processes in animal zygotes using transcriptomics (considering effects on gene transcription 

within the context of TADs), an approach congruen t with the philosophy of physics  (Carnap 

2012) . Quantitative measurements of mechanical forces in the zygote and early embryonic 

stages may allow the investigation of emergent properties, such as the formation of migratory 

epithelia during epiboly in invertebrates, with the potential to reduce these phe nomena to 

physicochemical principles. From a physics standpoint, it is crucial to identify a minimal set 

of non -linear interactions that are both necessary and sufficient for the emergence of specific 

embryonic properties. By applying this strategy, we can  integrate physics into organismal 

biology from a cancer perspective  (Cofre 2025) , using in vivo models without decomposing 

the system.  Recognizing  the inherent limitations of functional genomics  (Medina 2005; 

Boogerd et al. 2007)  may  bring us closer to developing fully testable and falsifiable theories of 

embryogenesis, thereby establishing embryology as a solid framework for exploring physical 

principles. 26 

A physical perspective on cell differentiation invites a paradigm shift. Evolutionary 

biology and the study of biological diversity  (Gilbert 2003)  have, incomprehensibly, distanced 

themselves from physics. Biologists have largely ignored, or even renounced, the task of 

understanding how animal forms generate themselves  (Bolker 1995; Ball 2015) . Even the bold 

attempt to acknowledge that understanding the creation of any animal form would be 

impossible without knowledge of physics has often been overlooked  (Keller 2012; Green and 

Batterman 2017) . I foresee several consequences of adopting a physical approach to 

embryology (developmental physics) in modern medicine. If physicists and biophysicists 

engage with cell differentiation, embryology, and cancer, the focus in breast cancer therapy 

may shift  away from genes  (Puget et al. 2002)  toward  textural gradients  (Dai et al. 2018, 2020b; 

Ren et al. 2019) . In my proposal, the embryo serves as a biological inspiration for designing 

matrices aligned with a dynamic, autonomous ECM capable of generating forces  (Loganathan 

et al. 2016) . In this view, the biomechanical structure of morphogenesis is what drives cell 

differentiation. Another potential medical application would be studying the physical 

phenomena associated with the constant growth and retraction of the breast during a woman' s

menstrual cycle, which could inform both prevention and therapy for breast cancer. Meanwhile, 

the study of textural gradients in embryonic models in vivo is already possible  (Zhu et al. 2025) .

Mapping tissue textures, forces, and tension in embryos is part of our current reality, and only 

in the future will we  fully unravel the therapeutic potential of embryonic mechanobiology. 

Acknowledgments 

I thank Dr. Jose Bastos, pathologist and oncologist, for his  ongoing  contribution s to my 

cancer research projects.  I apologi ze  to  any  researcher who w as  not  cited  in the article, given 

the  necessity of prioritizing references in its construction. 27 

Conflict of interest statement 

This  research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships 

that could be  construed  as potential conflict s of interest. 

References 

Abad M, Mosteiro  L, Pantoja C, et al (2013) Reprogramming in vivo produces teratomas and 

iPS cells with totipotency features.  Nature 502:340 –345. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12586 

Adamo L, Naveiras O, Wenzel PL, et al (2009) Biomechanical forces promote embryonic 

haematopoiesis. Nature 459:. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08073 

Aegerter -Wilmsen T, Heimlicher MB, Smith AC, et al (2012) Integrating force -sensing and 

signaling pathways in a model for the regulation of wing imaginal disc size. 

Development (Cambridge) 139:. https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.082800 

Agarwal P, Zaidel -Bar R (2021) Mechanosensing in embryogenesis.  Curr Opin Cell Biol 

68:1 –9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceb.2020.08.007 

Ahmadzadeh H, Webster MR, Behera R, et al (2017) Modeling the two -way feedback 

between contractility and matrix realignment reveals a nonlinear mode of cancer cell 

invasion. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114:. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1617037114 

Aires R, Dias A, Mallo M (2018) Deconstructing the molecular mechanisms shaping the 

vertebrate body plan. Curr Opin Cell Biol 55:81 –86. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceb.2018.05.009 

Alam SG, Zhang Q, Prasad N, et al (2016) The mammalian LINC complex regulates genome 

transcriptional responses to substrate rigidity. Sci Rep 6:. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/srep38063 

Alisafaei F, Shakiba D, Hong Y, et al (2025) Tension anisotropy drives fibroblast phenotypic 

transition by self -reinforcing cell –extracellular matrix mechanical feedback. Nat Mater 

24:. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563 -025 -02162 -5

Almassalha LM, Carignano M, Liwag EP, et al (2025) Chromatin conformation, gene 

transcription, and nucleosome remodeling as an emergent system.  Sci Adv 11:eadq6652. 

https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adq6652 

Aloia L, Di Stefano B, Di Croce L (2013) Polycomb complexes in stem cells and embryonic 

development.  Development 140:2525 –2534. https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.091553 28 

Andrade RP, Palmeirim I, Bajanca F (2007) Molecular clocks underlying vertebrate embryo 

segmentation: A 10 -year -old hairy -go -round . Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today 

81:65 –83. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/bdrc.20094 

Ankam S, Suryana M, Chan LY, et al (2013) Substrate topography and size determine the 

fate of human embryonic stem cells to neuronal or glial lineage. Acta Biomater 9:4535 –

4545. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2012.08.018 

Antonov SA, Novosadova E V (2021) Current State -of -the -Art and Unresolved Problems in 

Using Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell -Derived Dopamine Neurons for 

Parkinson’s Disease Drug Development. Int J Mol Sci 22:3381. 

https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22073381 

Arcila D, Ortí G, Vari R, et al (2017) Genome -wide interrogation advances resolution of 

recalcitrant groups in the tree of life. Nat Ecol Evol 1:0020. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559 -016 -0020 

Arechaga J (2003) On the boundary between development and neoplasia. An interview with 

Professor G. Barry Pierce. International Journal of Developmental Biology 37:5 –16 

Baena -Lopez LA, Nojima H, Vincent JP (2012) Integration of morphogen signalling within 

the growth regulatory network. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 24 

Bailles A, Collinet C, Philippe J -M, et al (2019) Genetic induction and mechanochemical 

propagation of a morphogenetic wave. Nature 572:467 –473. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586 -019 -1492 -9

Balestrini JL, Chaudhry S, Sarrazy V, et al (2012) The mechanical memory of lung 

myofibroblasts. Integrative Biology 4:410. https://doi.org/10.1039/c2ib00149g 

Ball P (2015) Forging patterns and making waves from biology to geology: a commentary on 

Turing (1952) ‘The chemical basis of morphogenesis.’ Philosophical Transactions of the 

Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 370:20140218. 

https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2014.0218 

Bannister AJ, Kouzarides T (2011) Regulation of chromatin by histone modifications. Cell 

Res 21:381 –395. https://doi.org/10.1038/cr.2011.22 

Bard JBL (1988) A traction -based mechanism for somitogenesis in the chick. Roux’s 

Archives of Developmental Biology 197:. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00385686 

Beglova N, Blacklow SC, Takagi J, Springer TA (2002) Cysteine -rich module structure 

reveals a fulcrum for integrin rearrangement upon activation. Nat Struct Biol 9:282 –287. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nsb779 

Bertet C, Sulak L, Lecuit T (2004) Myosin -dependent junction remodelling controls planar 

cell intercalation and axis elongation. Nature 429:. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature02590 

Bintu B, Mateo LJ, Su J -H, et al (2018) Super -resolution chromatin tracing reveals domains 

and cooperative interactions in single cells. Science (1979) 362:eaau1783. 

https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aau1783 29 

Bolker JA (1995) Model systems in developmental biology.  BioEssays 17:451 –455. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.950170513 

Boogerd F, Bruggeman FJ, Hofmeyr J -HS, Westerhoff H V (2007) Systems biology: 

philosophical foundations. Elsevier 

Bracken AP, Kleine -Kohlbrecher D, Dietrich N, et al (2007) The Polycomb group proteins 

bind throughout the INK4A -ARF locus and are disassociated in senescent cells. Genes 

Dev 21:525 –530 

Bronner -Fraser M (1982) Distribution of latex beads and retinal pigment epithelial cells along 

the ventral neural crest pathway. Dev Biol 91:. https://doi.org/10.1016/0012 -

1606(82)90007 -0

Brunet T, Bouclet A, Ahmadi P, et al (2013) Evolutionary conservation of early mesoderm 

specification by mechanotransduction in Bilateria. Nat Commun 4:2821. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms3821 

Cambria E, Coughlin MF, Floryan MA, et al (2024) Linking cell mechanical memory and 

cancer metastasis. Nat Rev Cancer 24:216 –228. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41568 -023 -

00656 -5

Carley E, Stewart RK, Zieman A, et al (2021) The linc complex transmits integrin -dependent 

tension to the nuclear lamina and represses epidermal differentiation. Elife 10:. 

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.58541 

Carnap R (2012) An introduction to the philosophy of science. Courier Corporation 

Chaudhuri O, Cooper -White J, Janmey PA, et al (2020) Effects of extracellular matrix 

viscoelasticity on cellular behaviour.  Nature 584 

Chen CS, Mrksich M, Huang S, et al (1997) Geometric control of cell life and death. Science 

(1979) 276:. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.276.5317.1425 

Cofre J (2025) The first embryo, the origin of cancer and animal phylogeny. V. Cancer stem 

cells as the unifying biomechanical principle between embryology and oncology. 

Mechanobiology in Medicine 3:100110. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mbm.2024.100110 

Cofre J (2024) The first embryo, the origin of cancer and animal phylogeny. IV. The 

neoplastic basis for the formation of the innate immune system. Front Ecol Evol 

11:1260930. https://doi.org/10.3389/fevo.2023.1260930 

Cofre J (2023) The first embryo, the origin of cancer and animal phylogeny. II. The 

neoplastic process as an evolutionary engine. J Biosci 49:3. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s12038 -023 -00400 -z

Cofre J, Saalfeld K (2023) The first embryo, the origin of cancer and animal phylogeny. I. A 

presentation of the neoplastic process and its connection with cell fusion and germline 

formation. Front Cell Dev Biol 10:. https://doi.org/10.3389/fcell.2022.1067 248 

Coggin JH, Anderson NG (1974) Cancer, differentiation and embryonic antigens: some 

central problems. Adv Cancer Res 19:105 –165 30 

Cooke J, Zeeman EC (1976) A clock and wavefront model for control of the number of 

repeated structures during animal morphogenesis.  J Theor Biol 58:. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022 -5193(76)80131 -2

Dado D, Sagi M, Levenberg S, Zemel A (2012) Mechanical Control of Stem Cell 

Differentiation. Regenerative Med 7:101 –116. https://doi.org/10.2217/rme.11.99 

Dai EN, Heo S -J, Mauck RL (2020a) “Looping In” Mechanics: Mechanobiologic Regulation 

of the Nucleus and the Epigenome. Adv Healthc Mater 9:2000030. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.202000030 

Dai J, Kong N, Lu Y, et al (2018) Bioinspired Conical Micropattern Modulates Cell 

Behaviors. ACS Appl Bio Mater 1:. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsabm.8b00362 

Dai J, Wang Y, Gong J, Yao Y (2020b) Biointerface anisotropy modulates migration of 

breast cancer cell.  Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces 190:. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfb.2020.110973 

Dalby MJ, Gadegaard N, Oreffo ROC (2014) Harnessing nanotopography and integrin -

matrix interactions to influence stem cell fate. Nat Mater 13:. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat3980 

Das D, Jülich D, Schwendinger -Schreck J, et al (2019) Organization of Embryonic 

Morphogenesis via Mechanical Information. Dev Cell 49:829 -839.e5. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2019.05.014 

Davies J (2017) Using synthetic biology to explore principles of development. Development 

(Cambridge) 144 

de Jong J, Looijenga LHJ (2006) Stem Cell Marker OCT3/4 in Tumor Biology and Germ 

Cell Tumor Diagnostics: History and Future. Crit Rev Oncog 12:171 –203. 

https://doi.org/10.1615/CritRevOncog.v12.i3 -4.10 

Dey A, Kundu M, Das S, et al (2022) Understanding the function and regulation of Sox2 for 

its therapeutic potential in breast cancer. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) -

Reviews on Cancer 1877:188692. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbcan.2022. 188692 

Díaz -de -la -Loza M del C, Stramer BM (2024) The extracellular matrix in tissue 

morphogenesis: No longer a backseat driver. Cells and Development 177:. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cdev.2023.203883 

Discher DE, Mooney DJ, Zandstra PW (2009) Growth Factors, Matrices, and Forces 

Combine and Control Stem Cells. Science (1979) 324:1673 –1677. 

https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1171643 

Du J, Xu Y, Sasada S, et al (2020) Signaling Inhibitors Accelerate the Conversion of mouse 

iPS Cells into Cancer Stem Cells in the Tumor Microenvironment. Sci Rep 10:9955. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -020 -66471 -231 

Dubrulle J, Pourquié O (2002) From head to tail: links between the segmentation clock and 

antero -posterior patterning of the embryo.  Curr Opin Genet Dev 12:519 –523. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0959 -437X(02)00335 -0

DuFort CC, Paszek MJ, Weaver VM (2011)  Balancing forces: architectural control of 

mechanotransduction. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 12:308 –319. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm3112 

Edgar A, Mitchell DG, Martindale MQ (2021) Whole -Body Regeneration in the Lobate 

Ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi.  Genes (Basel) 12:867. 

https://doi.org/10.3390/genes12060867 

Engler AJ, Sen S, Sweeney HL, Discher DE (2006) Matrix Elasticity Directs Stem Cell 

Lineage Specification. Cell 126:677 –689. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2006.06.044 

Engstrom TA, Zhang T, Lawton AK, et al (2018) Buckling without Bending: A New 

Paradigm in Morphogenesis. Phys Rev X 8:41053. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.8.041053 

Farfaglio G (1963) Experiments on the formation of the ciliated plates in ctenophores. Acta 

Embryol Morphol Exp 6:191 –203 

Fernandez -Gonzalez R, Simoes S de M, Röper J -C, et al (2009) Myosin II Dynamics Are 

Regulated by Tension in Intercalating Cells. Dev Cell 17:736 –743. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2009.09.003 

Fierro -Constaín L, Schenkelaars Q, Gazave E, et al (2017) The Conservation of the Germline 

Multipotency Program, from Sponges to Vertebrates: A Stepping Stone to 

Understanding the Somatic and Germline Origins. Genome Biol Evol 9:evw289. 

https://doi.org/10. 1093/gbe/evw289 

Franze K (2013) The mechanical control of nervous system development. Development 

140:3069 –3077. https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.079145 

Freeman G, Reynolds GeoT (1973) The development of bioluminescence in the ctenophore 

Mnemiopsis leidyi. Dev Biol 31:61 –100. https://doi.org/10.1016/0012 -1606(73)90321 -7

Gehring WJ (1996) The master control gene for morphogenesis and evolution of the eye. 

Genes to Cells 1:11 –15. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365 -2443.1996.11011.x 

Geresu DM, Speybroeck B, Sahir Mim M, et al (2025) 3D fluorescence lifetime imaging 

microscopy of Drosophila imaginal wing discs for studying membrane tension 

Gesson K, Rescheneder P, Skoruppa MP, et al (2016) A -type Lamins bind both hetero - and 

euchromatin, the latter being regulated by lamina -associated polypeptide 2 alpha. 

Genome Res 26:. https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.196220.115 

Gierer A, Meinhardt H (1972) A theory of biological pattern formation. Kybernetik 12:30 –

39. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00289234 

Gilbert SF (2000) The early development of vertebrates: Fish, birds, and mammals . In: 

Gilbert SF (ed) Developmental Biology. Sinauer Associates, Inc, Sunderland, MA 32 

Gilbert SF (2003) The morphogenesis of evolutionary developmental biology. International 

Journal of Developmental Biology 47:467 –477 

Glentis A, Oertle P, Mariani P, et al (2017) Cancer -associated fibroblasts induce 

metalloprotease -independent cancer cell invasion of the basement membrane.  Nat 

Commun 8:. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -017 -00985 -8

Golov AK, Gavrilov AA (2024) Cohesin -Dependent Loop Extrusion: Molecular Mechanics 

and Role in Cell Physiology. Biochemistry (Moscow) 89:601 –625. 

https://doi.org/10.1134/S0006297924040023 

Green S, Batterman R (2017) Biology meets physics: Reductionism and multi -scale modeling 

of morphogenesis. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in 

History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 61:20 –34. 

https://doi.or g/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.shpsc.2016.12.003 

Grima R, Schnell S (2007) Can tissue surface tension drive somite formation? Dev Biol 307:. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.04.032 

Grimaud C, Nègre N, Cavalli G (2006) From genetics to epigenetics: the tale of Polycomb 

group and trithorax group genes. Chromosome Research 14:363 –375. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10577 -006 -1069 -y

Gruenbaum Y, Foisner R (2015) Lamins: Nuclear intermediate filament proteins with 

fundamental functions in nuclear mechanics and genome regulation. Annu Rev Biochem 

84:. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev -biochem -060614 -034115 

Guacci V, Koshland D, Strunnikov A (1997) A Direct Link between Sister Chromatid 

Cohesion and Chromosome Condensation Revealed through the Analysis of MCD1 in S. 

cerevisiae. Cell 91:47 –57. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092 -8674(01)80008 -8

Guilak F, Cohen DM, Estes BT, et al (2009) Control of Stem Cell Fate by Physical 

Interactions with the Extracellular Matrix. Cell Stem Cell 5 

Gumbiner BM (1996) Cell Adhesion: The Molecular Basis of Tissue Architecture and 

Morphogenesis. Cell 84:345 –357. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092 -8674(00)81279 -9

Gumbiner BM (2005) Regulation of cadherin -mediated adhesion in morphogenesis.  Nat Rev 

Mol Cell Biol 6:622 –634. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm1699 

Guo R, Lu S, Merkel AR, et al (2016) Substrate modulus regulates osteogenic differentiation 

of rat mesenchymal stem cells through integrin β1 and BMP receptor type IA. J Mater 

Chem B 4:3584 –3593. https://doi.org/10.1039/C5TB02747K 

Gurdon JB (1987) Embryonic induction —molecular prospects. Development 99:285 –306. 

https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.99.3.285 

Hadden WJ, Young JL, Holle AW, et al (2017) Stem cell migration and mechanotransduction 

on linear stiffness gradient hydrogels.  Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114:. 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1618239114 33 

Hao M, Chen Y, Meng Y, et al (2026) Functionally Graded Surfaces and Materials: From 

Fabrication to Biomedical Applications.  Chem Rev 126:2143 –2196. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.5c00732 

Harland R (2000) Neural induction.  Curr Opin Genet Dev 10:357 –362. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/S0959 -437X(00)00096 -4

Hartman CD, Isenberg BC, Chua SG, Wong JY (2017) Extracellular matrix type modulates 

cell migration on mechanical gradients. Exp Cell Res 359:361 –366. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexcr.2017.08.018 

Hemmati -Brivanlou A, Melton D (1997) Vertebrate Neural Induction. Annu Rev Neurosci 

20:43 –60. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.20.1.43 

Henry GL, Brivanlou IH, Kessler DS, et al (1996) TGF -beta signals and a pattern in Xenopus 

laevis endodermal development.  Development 122:1007 –1015. 

https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.122.3.1007 

Henry JQ, Martindale MQ (2004) Inductive interactions and embryonic equivalence groups 

in a basal metazoan, the ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi. Evol Dev 6:17 –24. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1525 -142X.2004.04001.x 

Heo S -J, Han WM, Szczesny SE, et al (2016) Mechanically Induced Chromatin 

Condensation Requires Cellular Contractility in Mesenchymal Stem Cells. Biophys J 

111:864 –874. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpj.2016.07.006 

Heo SJ, Thorpe SD, Driscoll TP, et al (2015) Biophysical regulation of chromatin 

architecture instills a mechanical memory in mesenchymal stem cells. Sci Rep 5:16895. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/srep16895 

Herman EK, Ali M, Field MC, Dacks JB (2018) Regulation of early endosomes across 

eukaryotes: Evolution and functional homology of Vps9 proteins. Traffic 19:546 –563. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/tra.12570 

Hirway SU, Lemmon CA, Weinberg SH (2021) Multicellular mechanochemical hybrid 

cellular Potts model of tissue formation during epithelial -mesenchymal transition. 

Comput Syst Oncol 1:e1031. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/cso2.1031 

Holle AW, Tang X, Vijayraghavan D, et al (2013) In situ mechanotransduction via vinculin 

regulates stem cell differentiation.  Stem Cells 31:2467 –2477. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/stem.1490 

Hove JR, Köster RW, Forouhar AS, et al (2003) Intracardiac fluid forces are an essential 

epigenetic factor for embryonic cardiogenesis.  Nature 421:. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nature01282 

Huang X, Yang N, Fiore VF, et al (2012) Matrix Stiffness –Induced Myofibroblast 

Differentiation Is Mediated by Intrinsic Mechanotransduction. Am J Respir Cell Mol 

Biol 47:340 –348. https://doi.org/10.1165/rcmb.2012 -0050OC 34 

Hubaud A, Regev I, Mahadevan L, Pourquié O (2017) Excitable Dynamics and Yap -

Dependent Mechanical Cues Drive the Segmentation Clock. Cell 171:668 -682.e11. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.08.043 

Hudson C, Yasuo H (2021) Neuromesodermal Lineage Contribution to CNS Development in 

Invertebrate and Vertebrate Chordates. Genes (Basel) 12:592. 

https://doi.org/10.3390/genes12040592 

Huebsch N, Arany PR, Mao AS, et al (2010) Harnessing traction -mediated manipulation of 

the cell/matrix interface to control stem -cell fate. Nat Mater 9:518 –526. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat2732 

Hwang D -Y, Kim D -S, Kim D -W (2009) Human ES and iPS cells as cell sources for the 

treatment of Parkinson’s disease: Current state and problems. J Cell Biochem 109:292 –

301. https://doi.org/10.1002/jcb.22411 

Jager M, Chiori R, Alié A, et al (2011) New insights on ctenophore neural anatomy: 

Immunofluorescence study in Pleurobrachia pileus (Müller, 1776). J Exp Zool B Mol 

Dev Evol 316B:171 –187. https://doi.org/10.1002/jez.b.21386 

Jager M, Quéinnec E, Chiori R, et al (2008) Insights into the early evolution of SOX genes 

from expression analyses in a ctenophore. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol 310B:650 –667. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/jez.b.21244 

Jessell TM, Melton DA (1992) Diffusible factors in vertebrate embryonic induction. Cell 

68:257 –270. https://doi.org/10.1016/0092 -8674(92)90469 -S

Jones CM, Armes N, Smith JC (1996) Signalling by TGF -β family members: Short -Range 

effects of Xnr -2 and BMP -4 contrast with the long -range effects of activin.  Current 

Biology 6:. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0960 -9822(96)00751 -8

Juliano CE, Swartz SZ, Wessel GM (2010) A conserved germline multipotency program. 

Development 137:4113 –4126. https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.047969 

Kalukula Y, Ciccone G, Mohammed D, et al (2025) Unlocking the therapeutic potential of 

cellular mechanobiology. Science Advances 11:. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aea6817 

Kawakami Y, Raya Á, Raya RM, et al (2005) Retinoic acid signalling links left -right 

asymmetric patterning and bilaterally symmetric somitogenesis in the zebrafish embryo. 

Nature 435:. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature03512 

Keller R (2012) Physical biology returns to morphogenesis.  Science (1979) 338:201 –203. 

https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1230718 

Kicheva A, González -Gaitán M (2008) The Decapentaplegic morphogen gradient: a precise 

definition. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 20 

Killaars AR, Grim JC, Walker CJ, et al (2019) Extended exposure to stiff microenvironments 

leads to persistent chromatin remodeling in human mesenchymal stem cells. In: 

Transactions of the Annual Meeting of the Society for Biomaterials and the Annual 

Inter national Biomaterials Symposium 35 

Killaars AR, Walker CJ, Anseth KS (2020) Nuclear mechanosensing controls MSC 

osteogenic potential through HDAC epigenetic remodeling. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 

117:. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2006765117 

Kim DH, Provenzano PP, Smith CL, Levchenko A (2012) Matrix nanotopography as a 

regulator of cell function. Journal of Cell Biology 197 

Kim J, Zheng Y, Alobaidi AA, et al (2020) Geometric Dependence of 3D Collective Cancer 

Invasion. Biophys J 118:. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpj.2020.01.008 

Kim Y, Shi Z, Zhang H, et al (2019) Human cohesin compacts DNA by loop extrusion. 

Science 366:1345 –1349. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaz4475 

Klepstad J, Marcon L (2023) A Clock and Wavefront Self -Organizing model explains 

somitogenesis in vivo and in vitro. bioRxiv 2023.01.18.524516. 

https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.18.524516 

Kopf J, Paarmann P, Hiepen C, et al (2014) BMP growth factor signaling in a biomechanical 

context. BioFactors 40 

Krebs ET (1947) Cancer and the embryonal hypothesis. Calif Med 66:270 

Krieg M, Arboleda -Estudillo Y, Puech P -H, et al (2008) Tensile forces govern germ -layer 

organization in zebrafish. Nat Cell Biol 10:429 –436. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb1705 

Kumar S, Maxwell IZ, Heisterkamp A, et al (2006) Viscoelastic retraction of single living 

stress fibers and its impact on cell shape, cytoskeletal organization, and extracellular 

matrix mechanics. Biophys J 90:. https://doi.org/10.1529/biophysj.105.071506 

Lammerding J, Schulze PC, Takahashi T, et al (2004) Lamin A/C deficiency causes defective 

nuclear mechanics and mechanotransduction. Journal of Clinical Investigation 113:370 –

378. https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI200419670 

Larrain J, Bachiller D, Lu B, et al (2000) BMP -binding modules in chordin: a model for 

signalling regulation in the extracellular space.  Development 127:821 –830. 

https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.127.4.821 

Latimer A, Jessen JR (2010) Extracellular matrix assembly and organization during zebrafish 

gastrulation.  Matrix Biology 29:89 –96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matbio.2009.10.002 

Le HQ, Ghatak S, Yeung C -YC, et al (2016) Mechanical regulation of transcription controls 

Polycomb -mediated gene silencing during lineage  commitment. Nat Cell Biol 18:864 –

875. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb3387 

Lee JJ, Park S, Kim I, Lee SS (2026) Recent Advances in Orthopedic Tissue Engineering: 

Bridging Stem Cells and 3D Printing. Small Struct 7:e202500724. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/sstr.202500724 

Lee JWN, Holle AW (2024) Engineering approaches for understanding mechanical memory 

in cancer metastasis. APL Bioeng 8: 

Levine AJ, Brivanlou AH (2007) Proposal of a model of mammalian neural induction. Dev 

Biol 308:247 –256. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.05.036 36 

Li CX, Talele NP, Boo S, et al (2017) MicroRNA -21 preserves the fibrotic mechanical 

memory of mesenchymal stem cells.  Nat Mater 16:379 –389. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat4780 

Lin Y -C, Murayama Y, Hashimoto K, et al (2014) Role of tumor suppressor genes in the 

cancer -associated reprogramming of human induced pluripotent stem cells. Stem Cell 

Res Ther 5:58. https://doi.org/10.1186/scrt447 

Loganathan R, Potetz BR, Rongish BJ, Little CD (2012) Spatial Anisotropies and Temporal 

Fluctuations in  Extracellular Matrix Network Texture during Early Embryogenesis. 

PLoS One 7:e38266. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0038266 

Loganathan R, Rongish BJ, Smith CM, et al (2016) Extracellular matrix motion and early 

morphogenesis. Development 143:2056 –2065. https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.127886 

Lund E, Oldenburg AR, Delbarre E, et al (2013) Lamin A/C -promoter interactions specify 

chromatin state -dependent transcription outcomes. Genome Res 23:. 

https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.159400.113 

Mao Y, Wickström SA (2024) Mechanical state transitions in the regulation of tissue form 

and function. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 25:654 –670. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41580 -024 -

00719 -x

Markert CL (1968) Neoplasia: A Disease of Cell Differentiation.  Cancer Res 28:1908 –1914. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1158/0008 -5472.CAN -21 -2176 

Marlow H, Arendt D (2014) Evolution: Ctenophore Genomes and the Origin of Neurons. 

Current Biology 24:R757 –R761. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2014.06.057 

Martindale MQ (1986) The ontogeny and maintenance of adult symmetry properties in the 

ctenophore, Mnemiopsis mccradyi. Dev Biol 118:556 –576. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/0012 -1606(86)90026 -6

Martindale MQ, Henry JQ (1996) Development and Regeneration of Comb Plates in the 

Ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi. Biol Bull 191:290 –292. 

https://doi.org/10.1086/BBLv191n2p290 

Martindale MQ, Henry JQ (1999) Intracellular Fate Mapping in a Basal Metazoan, the 

Ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi, Reveals the Origins of Mesoderm and the Existence of 

Indeterminate Cell Lineages. Dev Biol 214:243 –257. 

https://doi.org/10.1006/dbio.1999.9427 

Martindale MQ, Henry JQ (2015) Ctenophora. In: Wanninger A. (eds) (ed) Evolutionary 

Developmental Biology of Invertebrates. Springer Vienna, Vienna, pp 179 –201 

Martindale MQ, Henry JQ (1997) Reassessing embryogenesis in the Ctenophora: the 

inductive role of e1 micromeres in organizing ctene row formation in the ‘mosaic’ 

embryo, Mnemiopsis leidyi. Development 124:1999 –2006. 

https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.124.10.1999 37 

McBeath R, Pirone DM, Nelson CM, et al (2004) Cell Shape, Cytoskeletal Tension, and 

RhoA Regulate Stem Cell Lineage Commitment. Dev Cell 6:483 –495. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/S1534 -5807(04)00075 -9

Medina M (2005) Genomes, phylogeny, and evolutionary systems biology. Proceedings of 

the National Academy of Sciences 102:6630 –6635. 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0501984102 

Michaelis C, Ciosk R, Nasmyth K (1997) Cohesins: Chromosomal Proteins that Prevent 

Premature Separation of Sister Chromatids. Cell 91:35 –45. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092 -8674(01)80007 -6

Min J, Zhang Y, Xu RM (2003) Structural basis for specific binding of polycomb 

chromodomain to histone H3 methylated at Lys 27. Genes Dev 17:1823 –1828. 

https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.269603 

Mitrossilis D, Röper J -C, Le Roy D, et al (2017) Mechanotransductive cascade of Myo -II -

dependent mesoderm and endoderm invaginations in embryo gastrulation.  Nat Commun 

8:13883. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13883 

Mongera A, Michaut A, Guillot C, et al (2019) Mechanics of Anteroposterior Axis Formation 

in Vertebrates. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 35:259 –283. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev -

cellbio -100818 -125436 

Morita H, Grigolon S, Bock M, et al (2017) The Physical Basis of Coordinated Tissue 

Spreading in Zebrafish Gastrulation. Dev Cell 40:354 -366.e4. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2017.01.010 

Moroz LL (2015) Convergent evolution of neural systems in ctenophores. Journal of 

Experimental Biology 218:598 –611. https://doi.org/10.1242/jeb.110692 

Moroz LL, Kocot KM, Citarella MR, et al (2014) The ctenophore genome and the 

evolutionary origins of neural systems. Nature 510:109 –114. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13400 

Mott JD, Werb Z (2004) Regulation of matrix biology by matrix metalloproteinases. Curr. 

Opin. Cell Biol. 16 

Muñoz -Sanjuán I, Brivanlou AH (2002) Neural induction, the default model and embryonic 

stem cells. Nat Rev Neurosci 3:. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn786 

Murry CE, Keller G (2008) Differentiation of Embryonic Stem Cells to  Clinically Relevant 

Populations: Lessons from Embryonic Development. Cell 132:661 –680. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2008.02.008 

Na J, Tai C, Wang Z, et al (2025) Stiff extracellular matrix drives the differentiation of 

mesenchymal stem cells toward osteogenesis by the multiscale 3D genome 

reorganization. Biomaterials 312:. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2024.122715 

Naganathan SR, Popović M, Oates AC (2022) Left –right symmetry of zebrafish embryos 

requires somite surface tension. Nature 605:.  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586 -022 -04646 -

938 

Naylor A, Zheng Y, Jiao Y, Sun B (2022) Micromechanical remodeling of the extracellular 

matrix by invading tumors: anisotropy and heterogeneity. Soft Matter 19:. 

https://doi.org/10.1039/d2sm01100j 

Nelemans BKA, Schmitz M, Tahir H, et al (2020) Somite Division and New Boundary 

Formation by Mechanical Strain. iScience 23:. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2020.100976 

Nelson CM (2022) Mechanical Control of Cell Differentiation: Insights from the Early 

Embryo. Annu Rev Biomed Eng 24:. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev -bioeng -060418 -

052527 

Nelson CM, Xiao B, Wickström SA, et al (2024) Mechanobiology: Shaping the future of 

cellular form and function. Cell 187:2652 –2656 

Nematbakhsh A, Levis M, Kumar N, et al (2020) Epithelial organ shape is generated by 

patterned actomyosin contractility and maintained by the extracellular matrix. PLoS 

Comput Biol 16:. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008105 

Nikaido M, Tada M, Takeda H, et al (1999) In vivo analysis using variants of zebrafish 

BMPR -IA: Range of action and involvement of BMP in ectoderm patterning. 

Development 126:. https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.126.1.181 

Noordermeer D, Leleu M, Schorderet P, et al (2014) Temporal dynamics and developmental 

memory of 3D chromatin architecture at Hox gene loci. Elife 3:e02557. 

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02557 

North TE, Goessling W, Peeters M, et al (2009) Hematopoietic Stem Cell Development Is 

Dependent on Blood Flow. Cell 137:. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2009.04.023 

Nowlan NC, Murphy P, Prendergast PJ (2008) A dynamic pattern of mechanical stimulation 

promotes ossification in avian embryonic long bones. J Biomech 41:. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiomech.2007.09.031 

Packard DS, Jacobson AG (1979) Analysis of the physical forces that influence the shape of 

chick somites. Journal of Experimental Zoology 207:. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/jez.1402070109 

Pajic -Lijakovic I, Milivojevic M (2020) Mechanical Oscillations in 2D Collective Cell 

Migration: The Elastic Turbulence. Front Phys 8:. 

https://doi.org/10.3389/fphy.2020.585681 

Pajic -Lijakovic I, Milivojevic M (2022) Mechanical waves caused by collective cell 

migration: generation. European Biophysics Journal  51:1 –13. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s00249 -021 -01581 -x

Palacios J, Rodríguez JI, Ruiz A, et al (1992) Long bone development in extrinsic fetal 

akinesia: An experimental study in rat fetuses subjected to oligohydramnios. Teratology 

46:. https://doi.org/10.1002/tera.1420460111 39 

Palmeirim I, Henrique D, Ish -Horowicz D, Pourquié O (1997) Avian hairy gene expression 

identifies a molecular clock linked to vertebrate segmentation and somitogenesis. Cell 

91:. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092 -8674(00)80451 -1

Pang K, Martindale MQ (2008) Comb Jellies (Ctenophora): A Model for Basal Metazoan 

Evolution and Development.  Cold Spring Harb Protoc 2008:pdb.emo106. 

https://doi.org/10.1101/pdb.emo106 

Pang K, Ryan JF, Baxevanis AD, Martindale MQ (2011) Evolution of the TGF -β Signaling 

Pathway and Its Potential Role in the Ctenophore, Mnemiopsis leidyi.  PLoS One 

6:e24152. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0024152 

Paralkar VM, Weeks BS, Yu YM, et al (1992) Recombinant human bone morphogenetic 

protein 2B stimulates PC12 cell differentiation: potentiation and binding to type IV 

collagen. Journal of Cell Biology 119:1721 –1728. 

https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.119.6.1721 

Park J, Kim D -H, Levchenko A (2018) Topotaxis: A New Mechanism of Directed Cell 

Migration in Topographic ECM Gradients. Biophys J 114:1257 –1263. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpj.2017.11.3813 

Park JS, Kim DH, Kim HN, et al (2016) Directed migration of cancer cells guided by the 

graded texture of the underlying matrix. Nat Mater 15:. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat4586 

Parry LA, Lerosey -Aubril R, Weaver JC, Ortega -Hernández J (2021) Cambrian comb jellies 

from Utah illuminate the early evolution of nervous and sensory systems in ctenophores. 

iScience 24:102943. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2021.102943 

Paszek MJ, Weaver VM (2004) The Tension Mounts: Mechanics Meets Morphogenesis and 

Malignancy. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia 9:325 –342. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10911 -004 -1404 -x

Paszek MJ, Zahir N, Johnson KR, et al (2005) Tensional homeostasis and the malignant 

phenotype. Cancer Cell 8:241 –254. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2005.08.010 

Pianka HD (1974) Ctenophora. In: Giese AC, Pearse JS (eds) Reproduction of Invertebrates 

Marines, Volume 1: Acoelomate and Pseudocoelomate Metazoans. Elsevier, New York 

and London, pp 201 –265 

Pierce GB (1983) The cancer cell and its control by the embryo.  Rous -Whipple Award 

lecture. Am J Pathol 113:117 

Pierce GB, Johnson LD (1971) Differentiation and cancer. In Vitro 7:140 –145 

Pierce GB, Speers WC (1988) Tumors  as caricatures of the process of tissue renewal: 

prospects for therapy by directing differentiation. Cancer Res 48:1996 –2004 

Pierce GB, Wallace C (1971) Differentiation of Malignant to Benign Cells.  Cancer Res 

31:127 –134 

Piunti A, Pasini D (2011) Epigenetic factors in cancer development: Polycomb group 

proteins. Future Oncology 7:57 –75. https://doi.org/10.2217/fon.10.157 40 

Pobegalov G, Chu L -Y, Peters J -M, Molodtsov MI (2023) Single cohesin molecules generate 

force by two distinct mechanisms. Nat Commun 14:3946. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -023 -39696 -8

Poudineh M, Wang Z, Labib M, et al (2018) Three -Dimensional Nanostructured 

Architectures Enable Efficient Neural Differentiation of Mesenchymal Stem Cells via 

Mechanotransduction. Nano Lett 18:7188 –7193. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.8b03313 

Pourquié O (2003) The segmentation clock: converting embryonic time into spatial pattern. 

Science (1979) 301:328 –330 

Prado -Mantilla A, Ning W, Lechler T (2025) Molecular and mechanical signatures 

contributing to mouse epidermal differentiation and barrier formation. Elife 

13:RP100961. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.100961 

Puget N, Gad S, Perrin -Vidoz L, et al (2002) Distinct BRCA1 Rearrangements Involving the 

BRCA1 Pseudogene Suggest the Existence of a Recombination Hot Spot. The American 

Journal of Human Genetics 70:858 –865. https://doi.org/10.1086/339434 

Pukhlyakova E, Aman AJ, Elsayad K, Technau U (2018)  β-Catenin -dependent 

mechanotransduction dates back to the common ancestor of Cnidaria and Bilateria. Proc 

Natl Acad Sci U S A 115:6231 –6236. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1713682115 

Qi X, Li Y, Zhang Y, et al (2019) KLF4 functions as an oncogene in promoting cancer stem 

cell -like characteristics in osteosarcoma cells. Acta Pharmacol Sin 40:546 –555. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41401 -018 -0050 -6

Ramel MC, Hill CS (2012) Spatial regulation of BMP activity. FEBS Lett. 586 

Rao SSP, Huntley MH, Durand NC, et al (2014) A 3D Map of the Human Genome at 

Kilobase Resolution Reveals Principles of Chromatin  Looping. Cell 159:1665 –1680. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.11.021 

Ratajczak MZ, Bujko K, Wojakowski W (2016) Stem cells and clinical practice: new 

advances and challenges at the time of emerging problems with induced pluripotent stem 

cell therapies. Pol Arch Intern Med 126:879 –890. https://doi.org/10.20452/pamw.3644 

Rauzi M, Verant P, Lecuit T, Lenne PF (2008) Nature and anisotropy of cortical forces 

orienting Drosophila tissue morphogenesis. Nat Cell Biol 10:. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb1798 

Ren J, Wang Y, Yao Y, et al (2019) Biological Material Interfaces as Inspiration for 

Mechanical and Optical Material Designs. Chem. Rev. 119 

Richeldi M, Pobegalov G, Higashi TL, et al (2024) Mechanical disengagement of the cohesin 

ring. Nat Struct Mol Biol 31:23 –31. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41594 -023 -01122 -4

Rogers KW, Schier AF (2011) Morphogen gradients: From generation to interpretation. 

Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 27:. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev -cellbio -092910 -154148 

Rossant J (2008) Stem Cells and Early Lineage Development.  Cell 132:527 –531. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2008.01.039 41 

Ryan JF, Pang K, Schnitzler CE, et al (2013) The genome of the ctenophore Mnemiopsis 

leidyi and its implications for cell type evolution. Science (1979) 342:1242592 

Sagha M (2025) Neural induction: New insight into the default model and an extended four -

step model in vertebrate embryos.  Developmental Dynamics 254:785 –811. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/dvdy.70002 

Sambasivan R, Steventon B (2021) Neuromesodermal Progenitors: A Basis for Robust Axial 

Patterning in Development and Evolution. Front Cell Dev Biol 8:1772. 

https://doi.org/10.3389/fcell.2020.607516 

Schnitzler CE, Simmons DK, Pang K, et al (2014) Expression of multiple Sox genes through 

embryonic development in the ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi is spatially restricted to 

zones of cell proliferation. Evodevo 5:15. https://doi.org/10.1186/2041 -9139 -5-15 

Schuettengruber B, Bourbon HM, Di Croce L, Cavalli G (2017) Genome Regulation by 

Polycomb and Trithorax: 70 Years and Counting.  Cell 171:34 –57. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.08.002 

Schwank G, Dalessi S, Yang SF, et al (2011) Formation of the long range Dpp morphogen 

gradient. PLoS Biol 9:. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1001111 

Scott AK, Casas E, Schneider SE, et al (2023) Mechanical memory stored through epigenetic 

remodeling reduces cell therapeutic potential. Biophys J 122:1428 –1444. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpj.2023.03.004 

Sedlmeier G, Sleeman JP (2017) Extracellular regulation of BMP signaling: welcome to the 

matrix. Biochem Soc Trans 45:173 –181. https://doi.org/10.1042/BST20160263 

Seno A, Afify SM, Hassan G, Seno M (2022) Induced pluripotent stem cells as the source of 

cancer stem cells providing novel concepts of cancer: gaps between in vitro and in vivo 

in induced pluripotent stem cells modeling. In: Birbrair ABTDP (ed) Advances i n Stem 

Cell Biology. Academic Press, pp 265 –288 

Serra -Picamal X, Conte V, Vincent R, et al (2012) Mechanical waves during tissue 

expansion. Nat Phys 8:628 –634. https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys2355 

Shahbazi MN, Zernicka -Goetz M (2018) Deconstructing and reconstructing the mouse and 

human early embryo. Nat. Cell Biol. 20 

Shekaran A, García JR, Clark AY, et al (2014) Bone regeneration using an alpha 2 beta 1 

integrin -specific hydrogel as a BMP -2 delivery vehicle. Biomaterials 35:. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.03.055 

Shen X -X, Hittinger CT, Rokas A (2017) Contentious relationships in phylogenomic studies 

can be driven by a handful of genes. Nat Ecol Evol 1:0126. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559 -017 -0126 

Shih Y -R V, Tseng K -F, Lai H -Y, et al (2011) Matrix stiffness regulation of integrin -

mediated mechanotransduction during osteogenic differentiation of human 

mesenchymal stem cells. Journal of Bone and Mineral Research 26:730 –738. 

https://doi.org/https://do i.org/10.1002/jbmr.278 42 

Slack JMW (1993) Embryonic induction.  Mech Dev 41:91 –107. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0925 -4773(93)90040 -5

Soshnikova N, Duboule D (2009) Epigenetic temporal control of mouse Hox genes in vivo. 

Science (1979) 324:1320 –1323 

Sparmann A, van Lohuizen M (2006) Polycomb silencers control cell fate, development and 

cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 6:846 –856 

Spemann H, Mangold H (1924) Induction of embryonic primordia by implantation of 

organizers from a different species. In: Willier BH, Oppenheimer JM (eds) Foundations 

of Experimental Embryology. Prentice -Hall, Englewood Cliffs, pp 145 –184 

Srinivasan M, Scheinost JC, Petela NJ, et al (2018) The Cohesin Ring Uses Its Hinge to 

Organize DNA Using Non -topological as well as Topological Mechanisms.  Cell 

173:1508 -1519.e18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.04.015 

Stern CD (2006) Neural induction: 10 years on since the ‘default model.’ Curr Opin Cell Biol 

18:692 –697. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceb.2006.09.002 

Sthanam LK, Roy T, Patwardhan S, et al (2022) MMP modulated differentiation of mouse 

embryonic stem cells on engineered cell derived matrices. Biomaterials 280:121268. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2021.121268 

Strunnikov A V, Larionov VL, Koshland D (1993) SMC1: an essential yeast gene encoding a 

putative head -rod -tail protein is required for nuclear division and defines a new 

ubiquitous protein family. J Cell Biol 123:1635 –1648. 

https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.123. 6.1635 

Sun J, Chen J, Amar K, et al (2023) LAP2 β transmits force to upregulate genes via chromatin 

domain stretching but not compression. Acta Biomater 163:. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2021.10.029 

Sun J, Chen J, Mohagheghian E, Wang N (2020) Force -induced gene up -regulation does not 

follow the weak power law but depends on H3K9 demethylation.  Sci Adv 6:. 

https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aay9095 

Sunyer R, Conte V, Escribano J, et al (2016) Collective cell durotaxis emerges from long -

range intercellular force transmission. Science (1979) 353:1157 –1161. 

https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaf7119 

Swift J, Ivanovska IL, Buxboim A, et al (2013) Nuclear lamin -A scales with tissue stiffness 

and enhances matrix -directed differentiation.  Science (1979) 341:. 

https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1240104 

Tajik A, Zhang Y, Wei F, et al (2016) Transcription upregulation via force -induced direct 

stretching of chromatin. Nat Mater 15:1287 –1296. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat4729 

Takahashi K, Tanabe K, Ohnuki M, et al (2007) Induction of Pluripotent Stem Cells from 

Adult Human Fibroblasts by Defined Factors. Cell 131:861 –872. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2007.11.019 43 

Tan SJ, Fang JY, Yang Z, et al (2014) The synergetic effect of hydrogel stiffness and growth 

factor on osteogenic differentiation. Biomaterials 35:. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.02.040 

Tlili S, Yin J, Rupprecht JF, et al (2019) Shaping the zebrafish myotome by intertissue 

friction and active stress. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 116:25430 –25439. 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1900819116 

Tsai A, Crocker J (2022) Nuclear morphogenesis: forming a heterogeneous nucleus during 

embryogenesis. Development 149:dev200266. https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.200266 

Tse JR, Engler AJ (2011) Stiffness gradients mimicking in vivo tissue variation regulate 

mesenchymal stem cell fate.  PLoS One 6:e15978. 

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0015978 

Turing AM (1952) The chemical basis of morphogenesis. Phil Trans R Soci Lond B 237:37 –

72. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.1952.0012 

Uhler C, Shivashankar GV (2018) Nuclear Mechanopathology and Cancer Diagnosis. Trends 

Cancer 4:320 –331. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trecan.2018.02.009 

Uhler C, Shivashankar G V. (2017a) Regulation of genome organization and gene expression 

by nuclear mechanotransduction. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 18:717 –727. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm.2017.101 

Uhler C, Shivashankar G V. (2017b) Chromosome Intermingling: Mechanical Hotspots for 

Genome Regulation. Trends Cell Biol 27:810 –819. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcb.2017.06.005 

van den Brink SC, Alemany A, van Batenburg V, et al (2020) Single -cell and spatial 

transcriptomics reveal somitogenesis in gastruloids.  Nature 582:. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586 -020 -2024 -3

Veenvliet J V., Bolondi A, Kretzmer H, et al (2020) Mouse embryonic stem cells self -

organize into trunk -like structures with neural tube and somites. Science (1979) 370:. 

https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aba4937 

Vermot J, Pourquié O (2005) Retinoic acid coordinates somitogenesis and left -right 

patterning in vertebrate embryos. Nature 435:. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature03488 

Vining KH, Mooney DJ (2017) Mechanical forces direct stem cell behaviour in development 

and regeneration. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 18:728 –742 

Wang N, Butler JP, Ingber DE (1993) Mechanotransduction Across the Cell Surface and 

Through the Cytoskeleton.  Science (1979) 260:1124 –1127. 

https://doi.org/10.1126/science.7684161 

Wang X, Agrawal V, Dunton CL, et al (2023) Chromatin reprogramming and bone 

regeneration in vitro and in vivo via the microtopography -induced constriction of cell 

nuclei. Nat Biomed Eng 7:1514 –1529 

Wang X, Harris RE, Bayston LJ, Ashe HL (2008) Type IV collagens regulate BMP 

signalling in Drosophila. Nature 455:72 –77. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07214 44 

Wang Y, Gong J, Yao Y (2020) Extracellular nanofiber -orchestrated cytoskeletal 

reorganization and mediated directional migration of cancer cells. Nanoscale 12:. 

https://doi.org/10.1039/c9nr10143h 

Wang YK, Yu X, Cohen DM, et al (2012) Bone morphogenetic protein -2-induced signaling 

and osteogenesis is regulated by cell shape, RhoA/ROCK, and cytoskeletal tension. 

Stem Cells Dev 21:. https://doi.org/10.1089/scd.2011.0293 

Wei Q, Holle A, Li J, et al (2020) BMP -2 Signaling and Mechanotransduction Synergize to 

Drive Osteogenic Differentiation via YAP/TAZ. Advanced Science 7:. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.201902931 

Wei Q, Pohl TLM, Seckinger A, et al (2015) Regulation of integrin and growth factor 

signaling in biomaterials for osteodifferentiation. Beilstein Journal of Organic Chemistry 

11 

Wei Z, Lei M, Wang Y, et al (2023) Hydrogels with tunable mechanical plasticity regulate 

endothelial cell outgrowth in vasculogenesis and angiogenesis. Nat Commun 14:. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -023 -43768 -0

Weinstein DC, Hemmati -Brivanlou A (1997) Neural induction in Xenopus laevis: Evidence 

for the default model.  Curr Opin Neurobiol 7:. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0959 -

4388(97)80114 -6

Whelan N V., Kocot KM, Moroz TP, et al (2017) Ctenophore relationships and their 

placement as the sister group to all other animals. Nat Ecol Evol 1:1737 –1746. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559 -017 -0331 -3

Whitney WF (1901) Classification of cancer upon and embryological basis. Journal of the 

Boston Society of Medical Sciences 5:479 

Wilson PA, Hemmati -Brivanlou A (1995) Induction of epidermis and inhibition of neural 

fate by Bmp -4. Nature 376:331 –333. https://doi.org/10.1038/376331a0 

Wolpert L (1969) Positional information and the spatial pattern of cellular differentiation . J 

Theor Biol 25:1 –47. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022 -5193(69)80016 -0

Wolpert L (1971) Positional Information and Pattern Formation. Curr Top Dev Biol 6:183 –

224. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0070 -2153(08)60641 -9

Wymeersch FJ, Wilson V, Tsakiridis A (2021) Understanding axial progenitor biology in 

vivo and in vitro. Development 148:dev180612. https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.180612 

Yamada A, Martindale MQ, Fukui A, Tochinai S (2010) Highly conserved functions of the 

Brachyury gene on morphogenetic movements: Insight from the early -diverging phylum 

Ctenophora.  Dev Biol 339:212 –222. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.12.019 

Yamada A, Pang K, Martindale MQ, Tochinai S (2007) Surprisingly complex T -box gene 

complement in diploblastic metazoans. Evol Dev 9:220 –230. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1525 -142X.2007.00154.x 45 

Yan S, Li X, Dai J, et al (2017) Electrospinning of PVA/sericin nanofiber and the effect on 

epithelial -mesenchymal transition of A549 cells. Materials Science and Engineering C 

79:. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msec.2017.05.048 

Yang C, Tibbitt MW, Basta L, Anseth KS (2014) Mechanical memory and dosing influence 

stem cell fate. Nat Mater 13:645 –652. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat3889 

Young RA (2011) Control of the embryonic stem cell state.  Cell 144:940 –954. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2011.01.032 

Yu K, Srinivasan S, Shimmi O, et al (2000) Processing of the Drosophila Sog protein creates 

a novel BMP inhibitory activity. Development 127:2143 –2154. 

https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.127.10.2143 

Zhang H, Landmann F, Zahreddine H, et al (2011) A tension -induced mechanotransduction 

pathway promotes epithelial morphogenesis. Nature 471:99 –103. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09765 

Zhang H, Lin F, Huang J, Xiong C (2020) Anisotropic stiffness gradient -regulated 

mechanical guidance drives directional migration of cancer cells. Acta Biomater 106:. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2020.02.004 

Zhou J, Lee P -L, Lee C -I, et al (2013) BMP receptor -integrin interaction mediates responses 

of vascular endothelial Smad1/5 and proliferation to disturbed flow. Journal of 

Thrombosis and Haemostasis 11:741 –755. https://doi.org/10.1111/jth.12159 

Zhu M, Gu B, Thomas E, et al (2023) Durotaxis bridges phase transition as a function of 

tissue stiffness &lt;em&gt;in vivo&lt;/em&gt; bioRxiv  2023.01.05.522913. 

https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.05.522913 

Zhu M, Tao H, Samani M, et al (2020) Spatial mapping of tissue properties in vivo reveals a 

3D stiffness gradient in the mouse limb bud. Proceedings of the National Academy of 

Sciences 117:4781 –4791. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1912656117 

Zhu M, Zhang K, Thomas EC, et al (2025) Tissue stiffness mapping by light sheet 

elastography. Science Advances 11:. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adt7274 

Zhu Y, Oganesian A, Keene DR, Sandell LJ (1999) Type IIA Procollagen Containing the 

Cysteine -rich Amino Propeptide Is Deposited in the Extracellular Matrix of 

Prechondrogenic Tissue and Binds to TGF -β1 and BMP -2. Journal of Cell Biology 

144:1069 –1080. https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.144.5.1069 

Zimmerman LB, De Jesús -Escobar JM, Harland RM (1996) The Spemann Organizer Signal 

noggin Binds and Inactivates Bone Morphogenetic Protein 4. Cell 86:599 –606. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092 -8674(00)80133 -6

Zouani OF, Kalisky J, Ibarboure E, Durrieu MC (2013) Effect of BMP -2 from matrices of 

different stiffnesses for the modulation of stem cell fate.  Biomaterials 34:. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.12.007 

Figures 46 

Figure 1 

Figure 2 

Legends 

Figure 1.  Totipotency was acquired through mechanical impact during morphogenesis, thereby 

creating a persistent mechanical memory during the construction of the first animal embryo. 

The figure represents the hypothetical first embryogenesis (that is, before the fir st animal had 47 

been formed). It is proposed that the first embryogenesis arose from protist cells, from which 

animal phylogeny emerged. (A) General representation of epiboly in ctenophores, basal 

animals placed at the root of animal phylogeny. Cells performing epiboly do  so in direct contact 

with macromeres. Cell movement occurs in the aboral -to -oral direction, with an increase in 

mechanical tension in the expanding epithelium.  (B) As embryogenesis proceeds, stem cells 

(blue dots within the geometric network) record the m echanical history of the embryo as a 

persistent mechanical memory, which will allow the process to be reproduced in the next 

generation. The next generation is the first zygote produced by fertilization of animal germ 

cells, themselves generated by the fir st hermaphroditic embryo. The first animal zygote would 

express the persistent mechanical memory constructed during the first embryogenesis, as 

depicted here. For this to occur, the transition from somatic to germline lineage must happen 

late, after the fu ll mechanical record of the first embryogenesis has been established. The 

gradual development of totipotency is represented by an increasing intensity of blue in the 

figure. 

Figure 2.  Biophysical model describing the default preneural induction of the nervous system. 

The model is based on the proposal that cells undergoing epiboly generate intense tension 

forces and are capable of creating the textural gradient of the extracellular mat rix (ECM) by 

themselves. The ECM acts synergistically with  chemical signals (bone morphogenetic proteins, 

BMPs) secreted by cells. (A) Stiffness profile of the ECM of cells that underwent epiboly, 

produced by the stresses experienced by cells. (B) A gradie nt of BMPs, which trigger the 

formation of the epidermis and the ventral mesoderm, is produced and strongly accentuated by 

the ECM. Collagen IV sequesters BMPs and helps create a short -range BMP gradient. (C) It is 

possible to observe a region with low BMP  concentration (dark blue) near cells at the end of 

epiboly and a region without BMP concentration (light blue) farther away. (D) The only region 48 

with available BMPs (limited free BMPs) surrounds the cell, being in close contact with it. 

This organization allows for the formation of discrete spots of epidermal induction without 

connections between them. (E) An interconnected ECM network without BMPs  (low stiffness) 

is observed, which will be used for neural differentiation. (F) Polygonal profile generated by 

textural differences in the ECM. The nervous system differentiates in regions lacking BMPs. 

This profile corresponds to the epidermal polygonal  nerve network of ctenophores (Jager et al. 

2011).