Title: JASPER: Joint Bayesian Analysis of Spatial Expression via Regression

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.18742v1

Published Time: Wed, 22 Apr 2026 00:11:07 GMT

Number of Pages: 40

Markdown Content:
# JASPER: Joint Bayesian Analysis of Spatial Expression via Regression 

## Pritam Dey 1, * , Rajarshi Guhaniyogi 1, Yang Ni 1, and Bani K. Mallick 11Department of Statistics, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 

> *

All correspondence should be addressed to pritam.dey@tamu.edu 

Abstract 

Spatially resolved transcriptomics is a fast-developing set of technologies that enables the measurement of localized gene expression across spatial locations in a sample. Detecting spatially varying genes is critical for analyzing such data, yet existing methods often fail to account for inter-gene correlations, leading to inflated false positive and false negative rates. Additionally, most prominent methods rely on predefined spatial covariance kernels, making them sensitive to the complexity of spatial expression patterns. Motivated by a human breast cancer dataset, we address these limitations in existing literature through JASPER (Joint Bayesian Analysis of SPatial Expression via Regression), a Bayesian framework that jointly models spatial expression patterns across multiple genes using a spatial basis function regression approach. We demonstrate the superior performance of JASPER compared to existing methods in several real-world spatial transcriptomic datasets and supporting simulation experiments. JASPER identifies genes with stronger spatial correlation and greater biological relevance, as validated by overlap comparison, enrichment analysis, and pathway analysis using independent biological databases. Our results highlight the ability of JASPER to improve the statistical and biological interpretability of spatial transcriptomics data, making it a powerful tool for uncovering spatial gene expression patterns in complex biological systems. Details on the exact posterior inference algorithm, simulation settings, and additional results are provided in the Supplementary Materials. 

Keywords: Spatially resolved transcriptomics, single-cell data, gene expression, spike and slab priors, spatial basis function regression. 1

> arXiv:2604.18742v1 [stat.AP] 20 Apr 2026

# 1. Introduction 

## 1.1 Scientific Background 

Spatially resolved transcriptomics (SRT) is a set of rapidly advancing technologies that measure mRNA gene expression within the spatial context of tissue architecture (Zhang et al., 2021; Moses and Pachter, 2022). Unlike traditional transcriptomics methods that only measure average gene expression for bulk samples, SRT allows researchers to investigate where specific genes are expressed within a tissue sample. This spatial resolution is critical for understanding cellular architecture, tissue organization, and disease microenvironments. Broadly speaking, SRT technologies can be categorized as imaging-based and next-generation sequencing (NGS) based approaches. Imaging-based methods, such as Multiplexed Error-Robust Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (MERFISH) (Moffitt et al., 2016) and Sequential Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (SeqFISH) (Lubeck and Cai, 2012) utilize spatially resolved imaging to quantify mRNA molecules within intact tissues at single-cell resolution. In contrast, NGS-based approaches, including Spatial Transcriptomics (ST) (St˚ ahl et al., 2016), 10x Genomics Visium, Slide-seq (Rodriques et al., 2019) and Spatially Resolved Transcript Amplicon Readout Mapping (STARmap) (Wang et al., 2018) rely on spatially barcoded oligonucleotides to capture and sequence transcripts in spatially defined regions of the tissue. Comprehensive reviews of various SRT platforms can be found in Cheng et al. (2023); Lee et al. (2022). The emergence and popularity of these diverse platforms have necessitated the development of newer statistical methodologies tailored to model the highly (spatially) structured biological datasets obtained from SRT studies. With SRT data, we can identify genes that have spatially dependent expression profiles. These genes, commonly referred to as spatially varying genes (SVGs), can provide researchers with a host of valuable biological insights, including knowledge of 2tissue heterogeneity, characterization of underlying mechanisms and pathways, discovery of clinical biomarkers associated with specific tissue regions or cell types, and identification of potential therapeutic targets for personalized treatments. These critical scientific potentials underscore the importance of identifying SVGs as a key first step in analyzing SRT datasets. Consequently, there is an acute necessity for fast, accurate, and robust statistical methodologies to address the SVG detection problem. 

## 1.2 Related Work 

The SVG detection problem shares similarities with the problem of identifying differentially expressed (DE) genes for microarray data (D´ ıaz-Uriarte and Alvarez de Andr´ es, 2006). Both problems aim to identify genes that exhibit certain variation in expression. However the key difference is that while DE gene analyses aim to find genes whose bulk expression (i.e., expression over a large number of cells) vary across discrete sample groups such as treatments, SVG detection aims to identify genes that exhibit variation in expression according to spatial location in a tissue or cell-culture at a fine resolution (typically for single cells or a small number of neighboring cells). A variety of statistical and computational models have been developed to address the SVG detection problem. These methods are based on a variety of frameworks including (a) spatial metrics like Moran’s I statistic (Moran, 1950) or Geary’s C (Geary, 1954) for ranking genes according to spatial correlations, (b) model-based hypothesis testing frameworks such as SpatialDE (Svensson et al., 2018), SPARK (Sun et al., 2020), SOMDE (Hao et al., 2021), nnSVG (Weber et al., 2023), and Trendsceek (Edsg¨ ard et al., 2018), and (c) model-free approaches such as SPARK-X (Zhu et al., 2021) and sepal (Andersson and Lundeberg, 2021). A comprehensive review of various SVG selection methods can be found in Adhikari et al. (2024). However these methods all approach the SVG detection problem from a screening perspective, i.e., they consider genes one-by-one and test if they 3exhibit spatially varying expression patterns. While this gene-by-gene screening approach is highly scalable, these approaches ignore the co-expression of genes, i.e., the fact that the expression of a gene may be regulated by the expression of other genes or underlying biological states. To the best of our knowledge, no existing SVG detection method take these effects into consideration. We address this problem by approaching the problem from a variable selection perspective, i.e., we construct a model of correlated expressions for multiple genes at multiple spatial locations and use it to identify those genes whose expression is spatially varying. This perspective allows us to borrow tools from the rich variable selection and spatial variable selection literature, which we review below. Variable selection enjoys a central position in the statistics and machine learning literature. Traditional variable selection methods consist of both frequentist approaches such as subset selection (Miller, 2002), penalized regression (Tibshirani, 1996; Hoerl and Kennard, 1970) and model selection criterion such as AIC/BIC (Akaike, 1974; Schwarz, 1978) and Bayesian approaches such as spike-and-slab priors (George and McCulloch, 1993) and shrinkage priors (Park and Casella, 2008; Carvalho et al., 2010). Variable selection in classification and regression models improves interpretability, prediction accuracy, and model robustness. While these methods select subsets of variables that best explain a response variable globally, specialized methods exist for spatial variable selection, which aim to identify variables that best explain the spatial variability of a given variable. Driven by recent advances in environmental science, neuroimaging, and genetics, spatial variable selection methods have become immensely popular in modern spatial statistics literature. A typical albeit computationally intensive approach is recursive feature elimination with spatial cross-validation (Meyer et al., 2019; Ketu, 2022). Alternative strategies include geographically weighted regression techniques and their variants (Brunsdon et al., 1998; Wheeler, 2021) and spatially varying coefficient models (Gelfand et al., 2003; Guhaniyogi et al., 2022), which address spatially varying associations 4of predictors and responses. Geographically weighted regression approaches have been extended by allowing for site-specific (Lum, 2012; Scheel et al., 2013) inclusion of predictors and joint site-specific predictor selection and regression coefficient estimation (Boehm Vock et al., 2015; Choi and Lawson, 2018). In neuroimaging studies, spatial variable selection priors are often utilized to identify brain regions activated by stimuli (Lee et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2014) and to estimate relationships between image voxels and phenotypes. Some notable approaches to discern the relationship between image voxels and phenotypes employ basis function representations to model spatially varying image coefficients (Li et al., 2015), as well as place thresholded Gaussian process priors (Zeng et al., 2024) on spatially-varying image coefficients. Nakajima and West (2013) proposed a sparsity-inducing hard threshold prior for longitudinal data, providing room to extend such framework for similar spatial variable selection methods. Lastly, there is related literature on functional variable selection in function-on-scalar, scalar-on-function, and function-on-function regression frameworks (Chen et al., 2016; Reiss et al., 2017), which consider images as multi-dimensional functions. These frameworks popularly employ basis functions and functional principal components analysis with regularization on their coefficients, as detailed in Aneiros et al. (2022) and references therein. 

## 1.3 Our contributions 

In this article, we introduce JASPER (Joint Bayesian Analysis for SPatial Expression via Regression), a fully Bayesian method for detecting spatially varying genes in SRT data. JASPER incorporates the following key features: 

• Joint modeling of genes: JASPER simultaneously models multiple genes, capturing gene co-expression structures alongside spatial expression patterns. This contrasts with existing methods that analyze genes individually, potentially 5overlooking important spatial dependencies. 

• Spatial basis function regression: Instead of relying on pre-specified spatial covariance kernels, JASPER employs a spatial basis function regression framework, allowing for flexible modeling of diverse spatial patterns without the constraints of Gaussian process-based approaches. 

• Modeling of expression counts: JASPER models gene expression counts using a negative binomial distribution, avoiding the need for pre-normalization. Compared to Poisson-based models, the negative binomial formulation better accounts for overdispersion and zero inflation, both common in SRT data. Although our proposed methodology is adaptable to data from diverse SRT platforms as we demonstrate in this article, we were motivated by a recently published human breast cancer dataset (Jiang et al., 2024) obtained using the 10X Visium platform. In Section 2, we highlight the key features of JASPER within the context of this dataset, with a special focus on its complex tissue structures and the spatial heterogeneity of gene expression patterns. We illustrate how these challenges reduce the effectiveness of existing methods and showcase how our methodological innovations make JASPER a more robust and biologically meaningful alternative compared to the state-of-the-art competing approaches. Extensive simulations in Section 4 further validate our claims, showing that JASPER consistently identifies spatially varying genes (SVGs) with greater precision than competing methods. Section 3 formally introduces the JASPER model and outlines a partially collapsed, data-augmented Gibbs sampler for Bayesian inference. Section 4 validates JASPER through simulation studies. In Section 5, we present the results of applying our method alongside two state-of-the-art alternatives on the human breast cancer dataset, highlighting key biologically significant insights uniquely recovered by JASPER. To demonstrate the 6versatility of our approach, we apply it to two additional datasets obtained from different SRT platforms than the motivating breast cancer dataset. Finally, we conclude with a discussion of the key insights provided by our model and propose several potential directions for future research in Section 6. 

# 2. Human Breast Cancer Dataset 

The human breast cancer dataset, introduced in Jiang et al. (2024), comprises of mRNA gene expression counts for 17,651 genes measured at 2,518 spatially indexed locations within a section of human breast tissue diagnosed with invasive ductal carcinoma. The dataset was generated using the 10x Genomics Visium platform, a widely adopted commercial NGS technology. In addition to spatially resolved gene expression measurements, the dataset includes expert annotations from pathologists for a subset of spatial locations, offering additional histo-pathological insight. As shown in Panel (a) of Figure 1, these annotations vividly highlight the spatial heterogeneity inherent in the tissue structure. An important characteristic of SRT datasets in general and this breast cancer dataset in particular is that the expressions of several genes are highly correlated with each other (Figure 1, panels (e-h)). Existing SVG detection methods fail to account for these correlative structures owing to their gene-by-gene screening perspective. In contrast, the proposed method, JASPER, models these correlations explicitly using a joint Bayesian model, thus approaching the SVG detection problem though the lens of variable selection. This joint modeling approach allows JASPER to share expression information among these co-expressed genes and enables precise identification of SVGs by isolating spatially dependent variations from other sources of gene expression variability. Through simulation experiments (in section 4.1), we demonstrate how JASPER is able to achieve much lower false positive and false negative rates compared to existing methods. Further these 7simulations indicate that this improvement in SVG detection accuracy is more pronounced when genes are more strongly correlated. As demonstrated by the expert manual annotations in Panel (a) of Figure 1, the complex architecture of the tissue underlying this dataset features a diverse array of cells arranged within non-convex and non-contiguous spatial domains. This structural complexity results in intricate patterns of high and low gene expression, as shown in Panel (e-h) of Figure 1. Most current model-based SVG detection approaches rely on Gaussian processes to model spatial dependencies. However, these methods are often constrained by their choice of covariance kernels. For instance, commonly used squared-exponential and, more generally, Matern kernels assume stationarity in Gaussian processes—an assumption frequently violated in SVG expression profiles. Notably, in our breast cancer dataset, visual inspection of the omnidirectional semivariograms reveals clear evidence of spatial non-stationarity – semi-variance does not stabilize with increasing distance; see one such example in Figure 1, Panels (c-d). Kernel mis-specifications can significantly reduce the statistical power of SVG detection methods. Some existing methods such as SPARK attempt to circumvent this issue by testing against several different kernel functions. However, their reliance on subjective kernel selection remains a critical limitation. To illustrate the sensitivity to covariance kernels, we conducted a simulation study (Section 4.2) where data was generated using a periodic exponential squared sine kernel. Under this simulation setting, kernel-based methods like SpatialDE (Svensson et al., 2018) and SOMDE (Hao et al., 2021), which utilize squared-exponential kernels, exhibited low true positive rates of 43.2% and 63.5%, respectively. In contrast, JASPER avoids the pitfalls of kernel selection by leveraging linear combinations of spatial basis functions. In the same simulation setting, JASPER achieved a true positive rate of 93.5%, demonstrating its ability to adapt to diverse spatial patterns without explicitly specifying a particular kernel function. 8Another important characteristic of this dataset is the pronounced spatial pattern in library sizes, defined as the total observed mRNA counts at each spatial location (Figure 1, panel (b)). Consequently, SVG detection methods that apply standard library size-based normalization techniques, such as SpatialDE (Svensson et al., 2018) and SOMDE (Hao et al., 2021), may inadvertently introduce spurious spatial effects, leading to inflated false positive rates. A common strategy to mitigate these artifacts involves normalization techniques that account for differential gene expression, such as trimmed mean of M-values (TMM) (Robinson and Oshlack, 2010) and upper-quantile normalization (Bullard et al., 2010). In contrast, JASPER directly models the raw expression counts using negative binomial distributions, which eliminates the need for pre-normalization while preserving the inherent statistical properties of the gene expression data. This approach also helps avoid potential distortions in the natural relationship between mean expression levels and variance in raw counts, a known issue with traditional normalization techniques (Lun, 2018). In addition to the breast cancer dataset, we demonstrate the versatility of our proposed methodology by applying it to two additional SRT datasets generated using other popular platforms. The first of these additional datasets was derived from the mouse visual cortex, was obtained using the STARmap technique (Wang et al., 2018) and includes expression counts for 160 genes measured at 891 spatially indexed locations. The second of these was is a mouse olfactory bulb dataset obtained using the Spatial Transcriptomics (ST) technology (St˚ ahl et al., 2016), and contains expression counts of 16,573 genes measured at 265 spots. In both datasets, our proposed method was able to detect more biologically and statistically significant SVGs compared to existing methods, which showcases the versatility of our approach across different SRT technologies. 9Figure 1: Human Breast Cancer data obtained using the 10x Visium pipeline. (a) Expert Annotatations of Spots, (b) Library Sizes, (c-d) Normalized gene expression and variogram for gene CTSD with empirical evidence of spatial non-stationarity, (e-h) Two pairs of highly correlated genes (correlation for left pair: 0.926, correlation for right pair: 0.867) 

# 3. Methodology 

Consider a typical SRT dataset consisting of counts mapped to p genes labeled 1 , 2, . . . , p 

observed at n spatial locations (cells/spots) labeled s1, s2, . . . , sn in a 2 dimensional spatial domain (the biological sample, such as a slide). Let Cj (si) denote the count for gene 

j at location si and let C(si) = ( C1(si), C 2(si), . . . , C p(si)) ⊤ denote the vector of gene expression counts for all genes at location si. Throughout this article, Ik denotes the k × k

identity matrix, 1k and 0k denote the k-dimensional vectors containing all 1’s and 0’s, respectively, and δv is a point mass at v.10 3.1 Negative Binomial Model for Observed Counts 

We model the gene expression count Cj (si) for each gene j at each location si using a negative binomial distribution conditional on a Gaussian latent variable, Yj (si). Specifically, we assume the following conditional probability mass function for Cj (si): 

f (Cj (si) | Yj (si)) = Γ( Cj (si) + Ni)Γ( Ni)Cj (si)! 

 μj (si)

μj (si) + Ni

Cj (si)  Ni

μj (si) + Ni

Ni

μj (si) = Ni exp( Yj (si)) (1) where the parameters Ni in equation (1) adjust for the differences in library size at each location and can be set accordingly. Default choices of Ni can be the respective true library sizes for each location, i.e., Ni = Ppj=1 Cj (si), or adjusted library sizes obtained from normalization algorithms such as TMM. As a rule of thumb, we suggest using the TMM normalized library sizes, especially when library sizes are themselves spatially varying. 

## 3.2 Spatial Basis Function Regression Model for Latent Variables 

Consider a set of K spatial basis functions defined over the spatial domain of the locations 

s1, s2, . . . , sn denoted as Xk(·) for 1 ≤ k ≤ K. We model the vector of latent variables corresponding to the location si, i.e., Y (si) = ( Y1(si), Y 2(si), . . . , Y p(si)) ⊤ as 

Y (si) = μY (si) + ϵ(si) (2) 

μY (si) = α + B⊤X(si) (3) 

ϵ(si) = ( ϵ1(si), . . . , ϵ p(si)) ⊤ IID 

∼ N p(0p, Σ) (4) where X(si) = ( X1(si), X 2(si), . . . , X K (si)) ⊤ is the vector of the K spatial basis functions evaluated at si, α = ( α1, α 2, . . . , α p)⊤ is the vector of gene-specific intercepts and B =(β1, β2, . . . , βp) is a matrix of regression coefficients. The spatial basis functions Xk(·) can be chosen to be any functions of the locations as long as the full set of basis functions is linearly independent. We do not make any additional assumptions on these functions for 11 our methodology; however, in both simulations and real data examples demonstrated in this article, we used the cubic B-spline basis functions (De Boor, 1978). Explicit expressions for these basis functions are provided in the Supplementary Materials Section A.5.2. Lastly, the covariance matrix Σ captures the co-expression patterns that may exist between various genes. 

## 3.3 Spatially Varying Gene Selection via Spike-and-Slab Prior   

> Y1(si)β1γ1C1(si)
> Σ
> Y2(si)β2γ2C2(si)

Spike and slab model for spatial genes 

γj = 0 ⇔ βj = 0

Co-expression of genes 

Negative binomial counts model 

Figure 2: Directed acyclic graph representation of the proposed JASPER model for two genes. For clarity, we have omitted the intercept α and the shared hyper-parameter g of the coefficients βj .Selection of SVGs is achieved via independent multivariate spike-and-slab priors on the gene-specific coefficient vectors βj for j = 1 , . . . , p . First, we define a vector of indicator variables γ = ( γ1, γ 2, . . . γ p), where γj = 1 if the gene j is an SVG and γj = 0 otherwise. Conditional on γj , we model that, 

βj | γj = 0 ∼ δ0K βj | γj = 1 ∼ N K (0K , g (X⊤X)−1) (5) 12 where X = (X(s1), X(s2), . . . , X(sn)) ⊤. To simplify notation, we define Y =(Y (s1), Y (s2), . . . , Y (sn)) ⊤ and let Bγ be the K × q sub-matrix of B containing only the columns corresponding to γj = 1, i.e., the non-zero columns, where q = Pnj=1 γj . With this notation, our model for Y , specified in (2) - (5), can be summarized in matrix form as: 

Y ∼ MN n,p (1nα⊤ + XB , In, Σ) (6) 

Bγ | g, γ ∼ MN K,q (0K×q, g (X⊤X)−1, Iq) (7) where MN u,v (M , U , V ) represents the u × v dimensional matrix normal distribution with mean matrix M , row covariance U , and column covariance V .The indicator vector γ is given a Beta-Bernoulli prior, i.e., γi | δ IID 

∼ Bern (δ) for all i,where δ ∼ Beta (c, d ). Integrating out the parameter δ leaves the following marginal prior for γ:

f (γ) = Γ( c + d)Γ( c)Γ( d)Γ( c + q)Γ( d + p − q)Γ( c + d + p) (8) Finally, we complete the specification of our model by choosing the following conjugate priors on the remaining model parameters, 

α | Σ ∼ N p(0p, h −1Σ) Σ ∼ IW p(ν, S) g ∼ IG (a, b )Throughout this article, non-informative hyperparameter values are used a = b = 0 .05, 

c = d = 1, S = Ip and ν = p + 1. The dependence structure is represented by a directed acyclic graph in Figure 2, which highlights the major components of our model, the spike-and-slab prior for the selection of SVGs, the co-expression dependence captured by Σ, and the negative binomial model for the counts. To summarize, the full JASPER model can be described by the following joint distribution of the data and parameters: 

f (C, Y , α, B, Σ, g, γ) = f (C | Y )

| {z }

> Counts model

f (Y | α, B, Σ)

| {z }

> Spatial regression

f (B | γ, g )f (γ)

| {z }

> Spike-and-slab model

f (α | Σ)f (Σ)f (g)

| {z }

> Other priors

(9) 13 3.4 Posterior Inference 

3.4.1 Data-Augmented Gibbs Sampler 

We perform efficient Bayesian inference for JASPER via Gibbs sampler. Our algorithm uses the Polya-Gamma data augmentation (Polson et al., 2013) scheme for sampling the underlying latent Gaussian matrix Y and a collapsed Gibbs sampling scheme for the SVG indicators γ. The algorithm iteratively samples Y , α, B, Σ, γ, and g from their respective conditional distributions. We present these full conditional distributions and sampling details in Supplementary Materials Section A.1. 

3.4.2 Selection of SVGs 

As the principal goal of JASPER is the detection of SVGs, the indicator vector γ is our parameter of interest. While the samples of γ obtained from the Gibbs sampler can be used in a variety of ways to obtain a set of SVGs, we recommend using the posterior probabilities of inclusion (PPI), defined as PPI j = PMm=1 γ(m) 

> j

/M , where γ(m) = ( γ(m)1 , . . . , γ (m) 

> p

)⊤ is the posterior sample of γ at the mth iteration. We select gene j as a SVG if PPI j > c for the threshold c chosen to ensures that the posterior expected false discovery rate (peFDR) is below a fixed value of 0 .05. peFDR is calculated as (M¨ uller et al., 2004), 

peF DR (c) = 

Ppj=1 (1 − PPI j )I(1 − PPI j < c )

Ppj=1 I(1 − PPI j < c ) .

## 3.5 Scalable Gaussian Version of JASPER 

Some SRT datasets have a very large number of genes as well as locations, which makes our Gibbs sampler too slow in practice due to significant computation needed to sample the latent variables Yj (si) and the associated Polya-Gamma augmented data. In addition, some datasets may only be available in normalized form. For these cases, we propose a simplified Gaussian version of JASPER based on normalized gene expression data, which 14 we refer to as JASPER-normalized. The detailed description of this simplified model is provided in the Supplementary Materials Section A.2.1. 

# 4. Simulation Study 

To comprehensively evaluate the performance of JASPER, we conducted three simulation studies that assess its behavior under different structural conditions relevant to SRT data. The first study investigates the ability of JASPER to borrow information across correlated genes, the second explores robustness to spatial kernel misspecification, and the third examines detection accuracy under varying levels of SVG sparsity. Across all settings, JASPER consistently outperforms existing methods, particularly under strong gene-gene correlations and complex spatial structures. 

## 4.1 Simulations for Co-Expression Modeling 

We considered two different data simulation models with dependent gene expressions. One model closely resembled the underlying model of JASPER. The other model was based on multivariate Gaussian processes. The exact details for simulating from these datasets is elucidated in Table A1 in the Supplementary Materials Section A.3. Each simulation model has two parameters ψ and ρ, both varying between 0 and 1. Parameter ψ is a spatial effect size, which controls the strength of spatial association (the higher this value, the more spatially varying the SVGs), while ρ controls the correlation between pairs of simulated genes (higher meaning more correlated). We chose five different values of the spatial effect size parameter ψ and three different values for the correlation parameter ρ. For each combination of the simulation model, ψ and ρ, we chose n = 200 locations uniformly from the unit square ([0 , 1] × [0 , 1]), and p = 100 simulated genes from each location, of which 20 were randomly chosen to be spatially varying. These simulated datasets were fitted with 15 the proposed JASPER model, along with competing models SPARK (Sun et al., 2020) and SpatialDE (Svensson et al., 2018). We repeated these experiments five times and plotted the average percentage of true positives (sensitivity) and true negatives (specificity) in Figure 3. These simulation plots clearly show that while all three methods perform well when the spatial effects are significant, JASPER outperforms both SPARK and SpatialDE more and more as the spatial effects become smaller, and this superior performance is more substantial when genes have higher correlations, thus demonstrating that a joint analysis is capable of improving SVG detection by accounting for gene co-expression patterns. 

## 4.2 Simulations for Kernel Independence of JASPER 

We devise a simulation study to demonstrate how kernel misspecification can affect the detection of SVGs. We simulate the normalized gene expressions for 50 genes at 200 randomly chosen spatial locations in the unit square. For gene j at location si, the normalized gene expression is simulated as Yj (si) = fj (si) + ϵij , where fj ∼ GP (0 , K j (·, ·)) for 1 ≤ j ≤ 10, fj (x) = 0 for 11 ≤ j ≤ 50, ϵ ∼ N (0 , 0.1), and Kj is the exponential sine squared kernel given by Kj (si, sk) = σ2 exp( −2sin 2(πd (si, sk)/p )/l 2 

> j

) with σ2 = 0 .1, 

p = 0 .25, and lj ∼ G (5 , 2), the gamma distribution. We applied SpatialDE, SOMDE (Hao et al., 2021), and JASPER-normalized to this data and repeated this experiment 50 times. The true positive rates were 43 .2%( ±8.8%) for SpatialDE, 63 .5%( ±7.3%) for SOMDE and 93 .5%( ±4.1%) for JASPER, which demonstrates that if the spatial expression patterns of the genes do not conform well with the covariance kernel of the method for detection, a significant number of SVGs will not be detected for methods relying on specified kernel functions, while our method can easily adapt to a wider variety of expression patterns. 16 Figure 3: Simulation-based comparison of JASPER, SPARK, and SpatialDE in terms of percentage of true positives and negatives for two simulation schemes for different correlation levels and degrees of spatial dependence among genes based on (1) A model close to the underlying model of JASPER; and (2) A model based on dependent Gaussian processes. 17 4.3 Simulations for Different SVG Sparsity 

While the existing methods check each gene one-by-one to check for spatial variability, JASPER does simultaneous SVG detection. Hence the number of SVGs in a given data may affect the detection of SVGs. In order to study the performance of JASPER under different levels of SVG sparsity, we conduct a further simulation study with varying proportion of SVGs. For this simulation study, we use the same simulation settings as in Simulation Setting 2 (Gaussian process based simulation) described in Section 4.1 and Supplementary Materials Section A.3. For this study, we fix the inter-gene correlation to be ρ = 0 .3 and spatial effect size ψ = 0 .2. We randomly select n = 200 locations from the unit square as before and fix the number of genes p = 100. We vary the number of SVGs be in the set {20 , 40 , 60 } and measure the true positive and negative rates for 50 repetitions and average the results for each choice of number of SVGs. We found that the average true positive rates were 73.52%, 87.21% and 97.3% respectively while the true negative rates were 83.92%, 86.72% and 88.52%, respectively. With these results we conclude that with increasing proportion of SVGs, the detection problem for JASPER becomes more accurate particularly in terms of true positive rates. The reason for this improvement is probably due to the correlation between genes, which allows JASPER to borrow information across SVGs to better learn the underlying correlation pattern. 

# 5. Real Data Applications 

We now demonstrate the performance of JASPER in terms of statistical power and biological interpretability compared to two state-of-the-art competing methods, namely SPARK (Sun et al., 2020) and SpatialDE (Svensson et al., 2018) for the three SRT datasets mentioned in Section 2. 18 5.1 Application to Human Breast Cancer dataset 

We apply JASPER to the motivating human breast cancer dataset from the iIMPACT study (Jiang et al., 2024). As a preprocessing step, we filtered out practically unobserved genes, i.e., genes with fewer than 100 total counts over all locations. Additionally, we eliminated genes with very low spatial signal using the screening method based on the Bayes factor described in Supplementary Materials Section A.2.2. Following these filtering steps, we ran the Gibbs sampler for 5000 iterations with the first 3000 as burn-in. For comparison, we ran the competing models, SPARK and SpatialDE, using their default FDR threshold of 5%. For this dataset, JASPER detected 672 SVGs, and SPARK and SpatialDE detected 567 and 709 SVGs, respectively. We used three different modes of comparison to evaluate the biological significance of the detected SVGs from each method. First, we compared how much each of the gene lists overlapped with the known breast cancer gene sets from two independent gene databases, namely, the Harmonizome database (Rouillard et al., 2016) and the Catalogue Of Somatic Mutations In Cancer (COSMIC) database (Tate et al., 2019). As reported in Table 1, we found higher overlap of the SVGs detected by JASPER with both the gene sets as compared to SPARK and SpatialDE. Comparing the genes uniquely detected by each of these methods, we again look at the overlap of the uniquely detected genes with the two databases mentioned above. Additionally, we calculated the Moran’s I statistic for these uniquely detected genes to quantitatively compare the degree of spatial autocorrelation of gene expression. As reported in Table 1, on average the Moran’s I statistic for the genes uniquely detected by JASPER (0.61) is higher than those detected by SPARK (0.41) and SpatialDE (0.34). Genes that are uniquely identified by JASPER include COX6C, a known (Wang et al., 2022) indicator of hormone-responsive breast cancer and EFNA1, a gene which is involved in tumor cell 19 proliferation, invasiveness, and metastasis (Hao and Li, 2020). 

Figure 4: Normalized spatial expression of genes COX6C (a-b) and EFNA1 (c - d) in two human breast cancer datasets. Both these genes were detected uniquely by JASPER in the 10x Visium dataset and were also detected in the ST dataset. Second, we compared the biological consistency of the detected SVGs by applying all three methods to another publicly available human breast cancer dataset from an earlier study (St˚ ahl et al., 2016). This dataset, consisting of 5,260 genes and 250 locations, was obtained using the older ST technology, which has a lower spatial resolution compared to the 10x Visium technology. Nevertheless, we found significant overlap between the genes detected by JASPER in the two datasets. More specifically, 89.8% of the genes detected by our method in the ST breast cancer dataset are also detected in the more recent Visium data. This proportion is much lower for SPARK (61.3%) and SpatialDE (54.9%). The genes COX6C and EFNA1, which we mentioned earlier, were among the genes detected by JASPER in both datasets. The normalized expression plots of these genes in both datasets are provided in Figure 4, which have quite clear spatial patterns. Third, a comprehensive gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was conducted for SVGs identified by all three methods using g:Profiler (Raudvere et al., 2019). A total of 1,527 Gene Ontology (GO) terms were enriched in the SVGs identified by JASPER, significantly outperforming SPARK and SpatialDE, which identified only 867 and 87 enriched GO terms, respectively. Further, using the genes exclusively identified by JASPER, the top 20 enriched molecular functions were related to “cell adhesion molecule binding” (GO:0050839; 

padj = 8.84 × 10 −20 ) and “extracellular matrix structural constituent” (GO:0005201; 

padj = 1.17 × 10 −17 ). These highly statistically significant terms are also highly biologically relevant to breast cancer in general and ductal carcinomas in particular. Notably, cell adhesion and extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions play a key role in the progression of ductal carcinomas where tumor cells often exploit these pathways to enhance metastatic potential (Baselga and Swain, 2009; Mehra et al., 2005). Additionally, enriched biological processes such as “extracellular matrix organization” (GO:0030198) and “immune response” (GO:0006955) suggest that the uniquely identified genes are involved in modulating the tumor microenvironment, influencing immune cell interactions, and contributing to the chronic inflammatory state often associated with tumorigenesis (Kufe, 2009; Carroll et al., 2005). Lastly, pathway analysis using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and Reactome databases provided further insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying breast cancer. Enrichment in pathways such as “ECM-receptor interaction” (KEGG:04512) and “Signaling by Interleukins” (REAC:R-HSA-449147) underscores the importance of ECM dynamics and cytokine signaling in cancer biology. The “ECM-receptor interaction” pathway is known to facilitate cancer cell migration and invasion by modulating integrin signaling, while “Signaling by Interleukins” plays a critical role in maintaining the pro-inflammatory environment that supports tumor growth and immune evasion (Ferrara, 2002; Kristiansen et al., 2003; Satelli and Li, 2011). Key genes such as ERBB2 , which is often amplified in aggressive breast cancers, contribute to signaling pathways that promote cell proliferation and survival. MUC1 , a glycoprotein overexpressed in breast cancer, is involved in cell signaling and adhesion, and GATA3 , a transcription factor, regulates estrogen receptor signaling in luminal breast cancer subtypes. These biological findings using the gene set uniquely identified by JASPER not only underscores it’s robustness in 21 detecting genes integral to the underlying biological mechanisms of breast cancer, but may also potentially contribute in identifying important therapeutic targets and biomarkers, which could enhance personalized treatment strategies for breast cancer patients. Table 1: Comparison of SVG detection methods for the Human Breast Cancer dataset obtained using 10x Visium technology SVG identification Methods JASPER SPARK SpatialDE SVGs SVGs Detected 672 567 709 Harmonizome overlap 207 134 37 COSMIC overlap 118 95 91 Unique SVGs Unique SVGs 234 195 236 Harmonizome overlap 56 37 15 COSMIC overlap 29 29 13 Average Moran’s I 0.61 0.41 0.34 Replication Analysis SVGs in secondary data 342 290 113 Replicated SVGs 307 178 62 (89.8%) (61.3%) (54.9%) 

## 5.2 Application to Mouse visual cortex STARmap data 

The STARmap data (Wang et al., 2018) consist gene expression from the visual cortex of mice after 1 hour of exposure to light following four days of dark exposure. This experiment was conducted to study how exposure to light plays an excitatory or inhibitory role on gene expression and how this effect varies over the spatial domain of the visual cortex. We randomly picked one mouse. There are 160 genes across 891 locations on the visual cortex, exhibiting a variety of spatial patterns. Some of these spatial patterns are shown in Figure 22 5. 

Figure 5: (a)-(c) Expression patterns of three genes from the STARmap dataset. (a) Banded spatial pattern; (b) Sparse collection of clusters of high expression; (c) No spatial pattern; (d) Diagram showing distribution of genes detected by JASPER, SPARK and SpatialDE, (e) Number of genes from the original study detected by each method. (f) Percentage of genes detected by each method which are biologically significant according to the Harmonizome database. We performed the same preprocessing steps and used the same settings as mentioned in the breast cancer data application for the three SVG detection methods. JASPER detected 53 spatially varying genes of various spatial patterns, compared to 45 and 22 SVGs detected by SPARK and SpatialDE, respectively. Most of the genes detected to be spatial by our model were indeed spatially varying based on visual examination. The expression patterns of two of these are shown in Figure 5 (a) & (b). Our model was also able to capture all 13 genes highlighted to be spatially varying in the original STARmap study (Wang et al., 2018) compared to 11 detected by SPARK and only 3 by SpatialDE. As these 13 genes are known to be biologically important and also known to exhibit spatial dependencies, this result provides an empirical validation of our model compared to competing models. 23 Among the genes not detected to be spatial by our model, most of them had low or zero expression values with only a few non-zero values. In contrast, SPARK and SpatialDE were often unable to capture genes that had sparse clusters of high expression. For example, in Figure 5(b), gene Gad1, which encodes the enzyme glutamate decarboxylase 67 and is crucial for the development and function of the nervous system including spatial memory, was detected by JASPER, but not by the two competing methods. A selection of some of the genes detected only by JASPER along with their biological significance is included in Table A3 in the Supplementary Materials. Lastly, as an additional validation of the genes identified by these methods, we compared the list of SVGs identified by each of the methods with a list of 898 genes associated with visual areas from the Harmonizome database (Rouillard et al., 2016). As shown in Figure 5(f), 35.3% of the genes obtained by JASPER were part of the Harmonizome list, compared to 27.1% and 5.5% for SPARK and SpatialDE respectively, which demonstrates that JASPER is able to capture more genes associated with the visual areas. 

## 5.3 Mouse Olfactory Bulb Dataset 

This dataset was a study of the mouse olfactory bulb (St˚ ahl et al., 2016) containing the expression of 16,573 genes measured at 265 spots. SPARK and SpatialDE identified 655 and 72 SVGs. In contrast, JASPER identified 713 genes. Figure 6 shows the expression profiles of one of the genes detected by each of the methods and validation of identified genes with existing knowledge. Like in the previous datasets, most of the genes that are detected by JASPER but not by the competing methods appear to have clear spatial patterns. Careful examination of the list of detected SVGs from JASPER as opposed to those by the other methods, we found that JASPER was able to detect all 10 of the genes highlighted in the original study (St˚ ahl et al., 2016) whereas SPARK and SpatialDE only found 8 and 4 respectively. Again, we argue that the ability of JASPER to detect more genes that are 24 known to be biologically relevant in the original study demonstrates the power of JASPER as an SVG identification method. Lastly, we again compare the gene sets from each method with a list of 593 genes known to be associated with olfactory areas of the mouse brain from the Harmonizome database. A selection of SVGs detected only by JASPER along with their biological significance is included in Table A3 in the Supplementary Materials. A higher number of SVGs from the original study detected by JASPER as well as the higher percentage (22.5% for JASPER compared to 17.3% and 5.7% for SPARK and SpatialDE) of SVGs detected by JASPER being present in the Harmonizome database demonstrates the higher power of JASPER compared to the two existing methods in identifying genes known in the literature to be associated with olfactory areas. 

# 6. Discussion 

We presented JASPER, a fully Bayesian model for detecting SVGs in SRT datasets. Unlike most existing methods for this task, JASPER is designed to model multiple genes simultaneously to account for co-expression. Additionally, the use of spatial basis functions instead of pre-specified Gaussian process kernels is a key feature that allows us to target a wide variety of spatial patterns without making implicit assumptions (for example stationarity) about the patterns in question. Through our simulations, we demonstrated that JASPER is able to achieve higher selection accuracy compared to state-of-the-art competing methods by leveraging shared information across genes. Our application of the method to real datasets confirmed that our model was indeed able to capture a higher number of biologically significant genes (according to the respective original studies and as well as an independent publicly available gene database) compared to the competing methods. 25 Figure 6: (a) - (d) Some expression patterns of different genes from the Mouse olfactory bulb dataset. (a) Detected by SPARK only; (b) Detected by SpatialDE only; (c) Detected by all three methods; (d) Detected by JASPER only; (e) Diagram showing distribution of genes detected by JASPER, SPARK and SpatialDE, (f) Number of genes from the original study detected by each method; (g) Percentage of genes that are of biological relevance according to the Harmonizome database. There are several directions for improvement and extensions of JASPER, which we may pursue in the future. Spatial variability in gene expression can often be explained by the presence of different cell types in various regions of the tissue (Yu and Luo, 2022). A straightforward extension of our method could involve modeling gene expression separately for each cell type. Another extension could be through multi-omic integration of gene expressions with other spatial omic data, which may potentially provide a more context-based methodology for SVG identification. Finally, genes can be classified by their expression patterns, which could be incorporated into the structure of the co-expression 26 covariance matrix. 

# Supplementary Materials 

Details on posterior inference algorithm, simulation settings and additional real data results are included in a separate “Supplementary Materials” document. 

# Data, Materials, and Software Availability 

All data used in this work are publicly available from the website https://lce.biohpc.swmed.edu/star/index.html. A GitHub link for our code will be made available upon the acceptance of the paper. 

# References 

Adhikari, S. D. et al. (2024). Recent advances in spatially variable gene detection in spatial transcriptomics. Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal .Akaike, H. (1974). A new look at the statistical model identification. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , 19(6):716–723. Andersson, A. and Lundeberg, J. (2021). sepal: Identifying transcript profiles with spatial patterns by diffusion-based modeling. Bioinformatics , 37(17):2644–2650. Aneiros, G., Novo, S., and Vieu, P. (2022). Variable selection in functional regression models: a review. Journal of Multivariate Analysis , 188:104871. Baselga, J. and Swain, S. M. (2009). Her2-positive breast cancer: The journey continues. 

Clinical Cancer Research , 15(10):5552–5556. 27 Boehm Vock, L. F., Reich, B. J., Fuentes, M., and Dominici, F. (2015). Spatial variable selection methods for investigating acute health effects of fine particulate matter components. Biometrics , 71(1):167–177. Brunsdon, C., Fotheringham, S., and Charlton, M. (1998). Geographically weighted regression. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series D , 47(3):431–443. Bullard, J. H. et al. (2010). Evaluation of statistical methods for normalization and differential expression in mrna-seq experiments. BMC Bioinformatics , 11(1):94. Carroll, J. S. et al. (2005). Foxa1 in breast cancer estrogen receptor signaling. Cell ,122(1):33–43. Carvalho, C. M., Polson, N. G., and Scott, J. G. (2010). The horseshoe estimator for sparse signals. Biometrika , 97(2):465–480. Chen, Y., Goldsmith, J., and Ogden, R. T. (2016). Variable selection in function-on-scalar regression. Stat , 5(1):88–101. Cheng, M. et al. (2023). Spatially resolved transcriptomics: a comprehensive review of their technological advances, applications, and challenges. Journal of Genetics and Genomics .Choi, J. and Lawson, A. B. (2018). Bayesian spatially dependent variable selection for small area health modeling. Statistical methods in medical research , 27(1):234–249. De Boor, C. (1978). A practical guide to splines , volume 27. Springer New York. D´ ıaz-Uriarte, R. and Alvarez de Andr´ es, S. (2006). Gene selection and classification of microarray data using random forest. BMC bioinformatics , 7:1–13. Edsg¨ ard, D. et al. (2018). Identification of spatial expression trends in single-cell gene expression data. Nature methods , 15(5):339–342. 28 Ferrara, N. (2002). Vegf and angiogenesis in breast cancer. Nature Medicine , 8(9):963–971. Geary, R. C. (1954). The contiguity ratio and statistical mapping. The incorporated statistician , 5(3):115–146. Gelfand, A. E., Kim, H.-J., Sirmans, C., and Banerjee, S. (2003). Spatial modeling with spatially varying coefficient processes. Journal of the American Statistical Association ,98(462):387–396. George, E. I. and McCulloch, R. E. (1993). Variable selection via gibbs sampling. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 88(423):881–889. Guhaniyogi, R., Li, C., Savitsky, T. D., and Srivastava, S. (2022). Distributed bayesian varying coefficient modeling using a gaussian process prior. Journal of machine learning research , 23(84):1–59. Hao, M. et al. (2021). Somde: a scalable method for identifying spatially variable genes with self-organizing map. Bioinformatics , 37(23):4392–4398. Hao, Y. and Li, G. (2020). Role of efna1 in tumorigenesis and prospects for cancer therapy. 

Biomedicine & Pharmacotherapy , 130:110567. Hoerl, A. E. and Kennard, R. W. (1970). Ridge regression: biased estimation for nonorthogonal problems. Technometrics , 12(1):55–67. Jiang, X. et al. (2024). iimpact: integrating image and molecular profiles for spatial transcriptomics analysis. Genome Biology , 25(1):1–25. Ketu, S. (2022). Spatial air quality index and air pollutant concentration prediction using linear regression based recursive feature elimination with random forest regression (rferf): a case study in india. Natural Hazards , 114(2):2109–2138. 29 Kristiansen, G. et al. (2003). Cd24 expression in breast cancer and its clinical relevance. 

Clinical Cancer Research , 9(19):4906–4913. Kufe, D. W. (2009). Muc1 in cancer: Function, prognosis, and therapy. Nature Reviews Cancer , 9(12):874–885. Lee, J. et al. (2022). Recent advances in spatially resolved transcriptomics: challenges and opportunities. BMB reports , 55(3):113. Lee, K.-J., Jones, G. L., Caffo, B. S., and Bassett, S. S. (2014). Spatial bayesian variable selection models on functional magnetic resonance imaging time-series data. Bayesian Analysis (Online) , 9(3):699. Li, F., Zhang, T., Wang, Q., Gonzalez, M. Z., Maresh, E. L., and Coan, J. A. (2015). Spatial Bayesian variable selection and grouping for high-dimensional scalar-on-image regression. The Annals of Applied Statistics , 9(2):687 – 713. Lubeck, E. and Cai, L. (2012). Single-cell systems biology by super-resolution imaging and combinatorial labeling. Nature methods , 9(7):743–748. Lum, K. (2012). Bayesian variable selection for spatially dependent generalized linear models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1209.0661 .Lun, A. (2018). Overcoming systematic errors caused by log-transformation of normalized single-cell rna sequencing data. BioRxiv , page 404962. Mehra, R. et al. (2005). Gata3 as a marker of hormone response in breast cancer. American Journal of Pathology , 166(5):1541–1551. Meyer, H., Reudenbach, C., W¨ ollauer, S., and Nauss, T. (2019). Importance of spatial predictor variable selection in machine learning applications–moving from data reproduction to spatial prediction. Ecological Modelling , 411:108815. 30 Miller, A. (2002). Subset Selection in Regression . CRC Press. Moffitt, J. R. et al. (2016). High-throughput single-cell gene-expression profiling with multiplexed error-robust fluorescence in situ hybridization. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 113(39):11046–11051. Moran, P. A. (1950). Notes on continuous stochastic phenomena. Biometrika , 37(1/2):17– 23. Moses, L. and Pachter, L. (2022). Advances in spatial transcriptomics and molecular imaging. Nature Reviews Genetics , 23(10):682–700. M¨ uller, P., Parmigiani, G., Robert, C., and Rousseau, J. (2004). Optimal sample size for multiple testing: the case of gene expression microarrays. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 99(468):990–1001. Nakajima, J. and West, M. (2013). Bayesian analysis of latent threshold dynamic models. 

Journal of Business & Economic Statistics , 31(2):151–164. Park, T. and Casella, G. (2008). The bayesian lasso. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 103(482):681–686. Polson, N. G., Scott, J. G., and Windle, J. (2013). Bayesian inference for logistic models using p´ olya–gamma latent variables. Journal of the American statistical Association ,108(504):1339–1349. Raudvere, U. et al. (2019). g:profiler: a web server for functional enrichment analysis and conversions of gene lists (2019 update). Nucleic Acids Research , 47(W1):W191–W198. Reiss, P. T., Goldsmith, J., Shang, H. L., and Ogden, R. T. (2017). Methods for scalar-on-function regression. International Statistical Review , 85(2):228–249. 31 Robinson, M. D. and Oshlack, A. (2010). A scaling normalization method for differential expression analysis of rna-seq data. Genome Biology , 11(3):R25. Rodriques, S. G. et al. (2019). Slide-seq: A scalable technology for measuring genome-wide expression at high spatial resolution. Science , 363(6434):1463–1467. Rouillard, A. D. et al. (2016). The harmonizome: a collection of processed datasets gathered to serve and mine knowledge about genes and proteins. Database , 2016. Satelli, A. and Li, S. (2011). Vimentin as a marker of epithelial-mesenchymal transition in cancer. Journal of Cellular Physiology , 226(5):1031–1037. Scheel, I., Ferkingstad, E., Frigessi, A., Haug, O., Hinnerichsen, M., and Meze-Hausken, E. (2013). A bayesian hierarchical model with spatial variable selection: the effect of weather on insurance claims. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series C: Applied Statistics , 62(1):85–100. Schwarz, G. (1978). Estimating the dimension of a model. Annals of Statistics , 6(2):461– 464. St˚ ahl, P. L. et al. (2016). Visualization and analysis of gene expression in tissue sections by spatial transcriptomics. Science , 353(6294):78–82. Sun, S. et al. (2020). Statistical analysis of spatial expression patterns for spatially resolved transcriptomic studies. Nature methods , 17(2):193–200. Svensson, V. et al. (2018). Spatialde: identification of spatially variable genes. Nature methods , 15(5):343–346. Tate, J. G. et al. (2019). Cosmic: the catalogue of somatic mutations in cancer. Nucleic acids research , 47(D1):D941–D947. 32 Tibshirani, R. (1996). Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B , 58(1):267–288. Wang, C. et al. (2022). Novel role of cox6c in the regulation of oxidative phosphorylation and diseases. Cell death discovery , 8(1):336. Wang, X. et al. (2018). Three-dimensional intact-tissue sequencing of single-cell transcriptional states. Science , 361(6400):eaat5691. Weber, L. M. et al. (2023). nnsvg for the scalable identification of spatially variable genes using nearest-neighbor gaussian processes. Nature communications , 14(1):4059. Wheeler, D. C. (2021). Geographically weighted regression. In Handbook of regional science ,pages 1895–1921. Springer. Yu, J. and Luo, X. (2022). Identification of cell-type-specific spatially variable genes accounting for excess zeros. Bioinformatics , 38(17):4135–4144. Zeng, Z., Li, M., and Vannucci, M. (2024). Bayesian image-on-scalar regression with a spatial global-local spike-and-slab prior. Bayesian Analysis , 19(1):235–260. Zhang, L., Guindani, M., Versace, F., and Vannucci, M. (2014). A spatio-temporal nonparametric bayesian variable selection model of fmri data for clustering correlated time courses. NeuroImage , 95:162–175. Zhang, M. et al. (2021). Spatial molecular profiling: platforms, applications and analysis tools. Briefings in bioinformatics , 22(3):bbaa145. Zhu, J. et al. (2021). Spark-x: non-parametric modeling enables scalable and robust detection of spatial expression patterns for large spatial transcriptomic studies. Genome biology , 22(1):184. 33 Supplementary Materials for “JASPER: Joint Bayesian Analysis of Spatial Expression via Regression” 

# A.1. Gibbs sampling algorithm for JASPER 

The posterior full conditional distribution for the latent variables Y takes the following form: 

f (Y | C, α, B, Σ) ∝

> n

Y

> i=1



Np(Y (si) | μY (si), Σ) 

> p

Y

> j=1

 μj (si)

μj (si) + Ni

Cj (si)  Ni

μj (si) + Ni

Ni

| {z }  

> f(C(si)|Y(si))



As this full conditional is intractable, we use the Polya-Gamma data augmentation trick (Theorem 1, Polson et al. (2013)) to efficiently sample Y which involves rewriting the logistic likelihood terms as, 

f (C(si) | Y (si)) ∝

> p

Y

> j=1

 μj (si)

μj (si) + Ni

Cj (si)  Ni

μj (si) + Ni

Ni

∝

> p

Y

> j=1

Z ∞

> 0

exp 



κj (si)Yj (si) − 12wj (si)Yj (si)2



fP G (wj (si) | Cj (si) + Ni, 0) dw j (si)

∝

Z   

> wj(si)>0∀j

exp 



κ(si)⊤Y (si) − 12Y (si)T WiY (si)



> p

Y

> j=1

{fP G (wj (si) | Cj (si) + Ni, 0) dw j (si)}

where κj (si) = ( Cj (si) − Ni) /2, κ(si) = ( κ1(si), . . . , κ p(si)), Wi = diag( w1(si) . . . , w p(si)) and fP G (· | a, b ) is the density function of the Polya-Gamma distribution with parameters 

a > 0 and b ∈ R (denoted by PG (a, b )) as defined in Polson et al. (2013). Thus augmenting the variables wj (si) into our joint model yields an easy way to sample Y from the following full conditionals: 

Y (si) | C(si), α, B, Σ, Wi ∼ N p (μ∗ 

> Y

(si), Σ∗(si)) (A1) 1wj (si) | Cj (si), Y j (si) ∼ PG (Cj (si) + Ni, Y j (si)) (A2) where Σ∗(si) = ( Σ−1 + Wi)−1 and μ∗ 

> Y

(si) = Σ∗(si) ( Σ−1μY (si) + κ(si) − δiWi1p) and (A2) again follows from Theorem 1 in Polson et al. (2013). For the ease of exposition of our Gibbs sampler, we permute the columns B so that the first q = Ppi=1 γi columns of B are the non-zero columns. With this permutation, we can write B = ( Bγ , Bγc ), where γc is the indicator vector obtained by flipping the entries of 

γ. Applying the same permutation to the columns of Y and to the rows and columns of 

Σ, we obtain Y = ( Yγ , Yγc ) and 

Ω = Σ−1 =

 Ωγγ Ωγγ c

Ωγcγ Ωγcγ



The full conditional distributions of the model parameters α, Bγ , Σ and g are: 

α | Y , B, Σ ∼ N p

 μα, (n + h)−1Σ (A3) 

Bγ | Y , α, Σ, γ, g ∼ MN K,q (μB , g (X⊤X)−1, Gγ ) (A4) 

Σ | Y , α, B ∼ IW p (ν + n + 1 , S∗) (A5) 

g | B, γ ∼ IG 



a + qK 

2 , b + 12tr  B⊤ 

> γ

X⊤XB γ



(A6) where 

μα =

Pni=1 Y (si) − B⊤X(si)

n + h Gγ = ( Iq + gΩγγ )−1

μB = g  X⊤X−1 X⊤(Y − 1nα⊤) ( Ωγγ Ωγγ c )⊤ Gγ

S∗ = S + hαα ⊤ + ( Y − 1nα⊤ − XB )⊤(Y − 1nα⊤ − XB )Lastly, to sample γ, we integrate out B from the full joint distribution to form a partially collapsed Gibbs sampler (Van Dyk and Park, 2008). Efficient sampling of γ is done via a standard Metropolis-within-Gibbs step using the following conditional distribution: 

f (γ | Y , α, Σ, g ) ∝ f (γ) det( Gγ )K/ 2

exp 

g

2 tr 

n

(Y − 1nα⊤)⊤PX (Y − 1nα⊤) ( Ωγγ Ωγγ c )⊤ Gγ (Ωγγ Ωγγ c )

o 

(A7) where PX = X(X⊤X)−1X⊤. The Metropolis-Hastings (MH) step in this case involves drawing a proposal for the updated value of γ by flipping one of the coordinates of γ

uniformly at random, i.e., 

q(γ∗ | γ) = U ({eγ | eγ and γ differ only in one entry })and accepting that proposal with probability min 



1, f (γ∗ | Y , α, Σ, g ) q(γ | γ∗)

f (γ | Y , α, Σ, g ) q(γ∗ | γ)



= min 



1, f (γ∗ | Y , α, Σ, g )

f (γ | Y , α, Σ, g )



Thus, the Gibbs sampler for JASPER works by iteratively sampling from the distributions in equations (A1 - A7). 2A.2. Simplified Versions for Computational Efficiency 

We state two simplified versions of JASPER for ease of computation in larger datasets, as well as for pre-screening the data. 

## A.2.1 Faster implementation for normalized data 

For this simplified version, we assume that the data has been normalized using some suitable normalization scheme and Yj (si) is the normalized expression data for the gene j

at location si. One example of a standard normalization is discussed in Section A.5.1 in this Supplementary material. Subsequently, we use the prior and likelihood functions as the main JASPER method, but now the Yj (si)’s are normalized expression data instead of latent variables as considered in the full model, and hence do not require sampling. Hence the simplified Gibbs sampler proceeds using the full conditionals described in equations (19-23). We refer to this simplified model as JASPER-normalized. 

## A.2.2 Screening method for almost zero and almost constant genes 

Gene expression datasets including SRT data often contain genes with only a few non-zero counts. The presence of these genes leads to stability issues for the Gibbs sampling. Additionally these are highly unlikely to be spatially varying. We used a simple screening method to eliminate such genes. We restrict JASPER-normalized as stated above to one gene and rewrite the gene detection problem as a model selection problem as below: 

Yj = ( Yj (s1), Y j (s2), . . . , Y j (sn)) ⊤ | βj , σ 2 ∼ N n

 Xβ j , σ 2In



M1 : βj ∼ N p

 0, gσ 2(XT X)−1

M0 : βj = 0p

σ2 ∼ IG (a, b )The advantage of this screening method is that the Bayes factor for model selection has a closed form making the screening process very fast, 

BF (M1, M 0) = (1 + g)(n+K−1) /2

(1 + g(1 − R2)) (n−1) /2 (A8) where R2 = 1 − (Yj −Xβ j )⊤(Yj −Xβ j )   

> Y⊤
> jYj

is the coefficient of determination. We use the plug-in Empirical Bayes estimate of g, i.e., 

bgEB = max 

(n − K − 1) R2

K(1 − R2) − 1, 0



.

We calculate the Bayes factor for each gene and then eliminate the genes with small values of the Bayes factor. 3A.3. Details on Simulation Experiments 

Table A1: Two simulation settings used to compare the performance of JASPER to competing models SPARK and SpatialDE in the presence of correlated gene expressions. 

Shared Simulation Framework 

Cj (si) ∼ NB(1000 , p j (si)) for j = 1 , . . . , p and i = 1 , 2, . . . , n Yj (si) = log 

 pj (si)1 − pj (si)



= μj (si) + ϵj (si)

ϵ(si) ∼ N (0p, Σρ), Σρ =



1 ρ . . . ρρ 1 . . . ρ

... ... . . . ...

ρ ρ . . . 1



Simulation Setting 1 

μj (si) = αj +

> 5

X

> k=1

βkj Zk(si)

αj ∼ N (−10 , 1) 

βkj ∼ N (ψj μk, 0.1) 

ψj =

(

0 for non-spatial 

ψ for spatial 0 < ψ ≤ 1(μ1, μ 2, . . . , μ 5) = (2 , −2, 3, 1, 4) 

Simulation Setting 2 

μj (si) = −10 + 

> 10

X

> i=1

βkj Tk(si)

Tk(si) = 

(

Zk(si) for non-spatial 

Wk(si) for spatial 

βkj ∼ Uniform {± 1, ±2, ±3, ±4}

Zk ∼ GP (0 , Mat´ ern(1 , 1.5, 0.05)) 

Wk ∼ GP (0 , Mat´ ern(1 , 1.5, 0.5ψ)) 0.01 < ψ ≤ 14Table A3: Biological significance of several genes, which were uniquely detected by JASPER 

Dataset Gene Biological Significance References 

STARmap Gad1 encodes the enzyme glutamate decarboxylase 67; crucial for the development and function of the nervous system; alleviates injury induced optic regeneration Zhu et al. (2022) STARmap Htr3a plays a role in reactivation of deprived visual cortex Lombaert et al. (2018) STARmap Npas4 regulates excitatory-inhibitory balance within neural circuits Spiegel et al. (2014) Mouse Olfactory Bulb Kif2a regulates the spindle assembly and the metaphase I-anaphase I transition in mouse oocyte Chen et al. (2016) Mouse Olfactory Bulb Grb2 hepatocyte growth factor regulates migration of olfactory interneuron precursors in the rostral migratory stream through Met–Grb2 coupling Garzotto et al. (2008) Mouse Olfactory Bulb Dlgap4 synapse organization and neuronal signalling; ventricular surface integrity and neuronal migration during cortical development Romero et al. (2022) 

# A.4. Real Data Results 

## A.4.1 Mouse STARmap data 

Table A2: Comparison of SVG detection methods for the Mouse visual cortex dataset obtained using STARmap technology SVG identification Methods JASPER SPARK SpatialDE SVGs SVGs Detected 53 45 22 Harmonizome overlap 19 12 1Original study overlap 13 11 3Average Moran’s I 0.73 0.61 0.41 Unique SVGs Unique SVGs 12 4 5Harmonizome overlap 6 1 0

# A.5. Miscellaneous implementation details 

## A.5.1 A normalization scheme for Gene Expression data 

A number of standard normalization techniques are prelevant for gene expression data. For JASPER-normalized, we used the following scheme as a default. 

Yj (si) = log 



1 + mCj (si) + 0 .01 

N (si)



(A9) where N (si) = Ppj=1 Cj (si) is the total count at location si, also known as its sampling depth and m is the median of the sampling depths across all locations. 5A.5.2 Cubic B-spline basis functions 

Cubic B-splines are widely used for constructing smooth approximations or interpolations of real functions defined in two or three dimensions. This spline basis ensures continuity up to the second derivative, providing excellent smoothness suitable for various applications like image processing and physical simulations. Mathematically, cubic B-spline basis functions, denoted as Ni, 3(t), where i is the index of the control point and 3 denotes the degree, are defined recursively using the Cox-de Boor formula: 

• For k = 0: 

Ni, 0(t) = 

(

1 if ti ≤ t < t i+1 

0 otherwise 

• For k ≥ 1: 

Ni,k (t) = t − ti

ti+k − ti

Ni,k −1(t) + ti+k+1 − tti+k+1 − ti+1 

Ni+1 ,k −1(t)For a real function on 2-dimensional space, f (x, y ), the cubic B-spline approximation is given by the tensor product of cubic B-spline basis functions: 

S(x, y ) = 

> n

X

> i=0
> m

X

> j=0

cij Ni, 3(x)Nj, 3(y)where cij are the coefficients which can be determined by fitting the spline to known data points or values of the function. Similarly, for a real function on 3-dimensional space, 

f (x, y, z ), the cubic B-spline representation extends to three dimensions as follows: 

S(x, y, z ) = 

> n

X

> i=0
> m

X

> j=0
> p

X

> k=0

cijk Ni, 3(x)Nj, 3(y)Nk, 3(z)where cijk are the spline coefficients and Ni, 3(x), Nj, 3(y), and Nk, 3(z) are the cubic B-spline basis functions corresponding to each dimension. The control points can be specified explicitly, or chosen to be equally spaced along the spatial coordinates. 

# References 

Chen, M.-H. et al. (2016). Kif2a regulates the spindle assembly and the metaphase i-anaphase i transition in mouse oocyte. Scientific Reports , 6(1):39337. Garzotto, D. et al. (2008). Hepatocyte growth factor regulates migration of olfactory interneuron precursors in the rostral migratory stream through met–grb2 coupling. 

Journal of Neuroscience , 28(23):5901–5909. Lombaert, N. et al. (2018). 5-htr 2a and 5-htr 3a but not 5-htr 1a antagonism impairs the cross-modal reactivation of deprived visual cortex in adulthood. Molecular Brain ,11:1–19. 6Polson, N. G., Scott, J. G., and Windle, J. (2013). Bayesian inference for logistic models using p´ olya–gamma latent variables. Journal of the American statistical Association ,108(504):1339–1349. Romero, D. M. et al. (2022). Novel role of the synaptic scaffold protein dlgap4 in ventricular surface integrity and neuronal migration during cortical development. Nature Communications , 13(1):2746. Spiegel, I. et al. (2014). Npas4 regulates excitatory-inhibitory balance within neural circuits through cell-type-specific gene programs. Cell , 157(5):1216–1229. Van Dyk, D. A. and Park, T. (2008). Partially collapsed gibbs samplers: Theory and methods. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 103(482):790–796. Zhu, Y. et al. (2022). Gad1 alleviates injury-induced optic neurodegeneration by inhibiting retinal ganglion cell apoptosis. Experimental Eye Research , 223:109201. 7