Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.24614v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Apr 2026 02:21:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 46

Markdown Content:
# The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Tanu Raghav 1,2, Daniel Guerrero 1,2, Uttara Tipnis 3, Julie Sara Benny 1,2,4, Mintao Liu 1,2, Mario Dzemidzic 5, Arian Ashourvan 6, Alex P. Miller 7, Beau Ances 8, Jaroslaw Harezlak 9, Joaqu´ ın Go ˜ ni 1,2,10 ,∗

> 1

Edwardson School of Industrial Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA 

> 2

Purdue Institute for Integrative Neuroscience, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA 

> 3

Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA, USA 

> 4

Department of Computational Science and Humanities, Indian Institute of Information Technology Kottayam, India 

> 5

Department of Neurology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indiana Alcohol Research Center, Indianapolis, IN, USA 

> 6

Department of Psychology, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, USA 

> 7

Department of Psychiatry, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA 

> 8

Department of Neurology, Washington University in Saint Louis, School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA 

> 9

Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA 

> 10

Weldon School of Biomedical Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA  

> ∗

Correspondence: Joaqu´ ın Go˜ ni (jgonicor@purdue.edu). 

Keywords: Functional connectivity, fMRI conditions, Classical twin model, Multilayer community detection, heritability, environment 

ABSTRACT 

Functional connectivity varies across individuals due to genetic and environmental factors, yet classical twin models typically confound non-shared environment with measurement error and are largely limited to resting-state analyses. We hypothesized that: i) explicitly modeling measurement error from repeated fMRI sessions enables more accurate application of classical twin models (ACE/ADE) to functional con-nectivity; ii) model applicability depends on scan-length and parcellation granularity; iii) genetic and en-vironmental effects on functional connectomes show differentiated functional modules across conditions.  

> arXiv:2604.24614v1 [q-bio.NC] 27 Apr 2026 /Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome

We extended ACE/ADE models to include a repeated-scan derived error term by analyzing monozygotic and dizygotic twins from the Young-Adult Human Connectome Project dataset. Genetic and environment variance components were estimated for all functional couplings across resting-state and task conditions, integrated across conditions using a minimum-error criterion, and analyzed using multilayer community detection across resolution scales. Functional couplings segregated into distinct categories characterized by shared environmental, additive, dominant, or epistatic influences, with a substantial fraction not meet-ing twin-model assumptions. Integrating across conditions revealed hierarchical community structure in genetic and environmental components observed across community resolution scales. Incorporating mea-surement error into twin models improves interpretability and applicability at the functional connectome level, revealing that genetic and environmental influences are structured into coherent, multiscale brain networks. 

AUTHOR SUMMARY 

Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies have shown that individuals exhibit distinctive patterns of brain connectivity that are reproducible across sessions, often referred to as “connectome fin-gerprints” (Abbas et al., 2023; Finn et al., 2015). Twin studies further indicate that these patterns are shaped by both genetic and environmental factors (Colclough et al., 2017; Pourmotabbed, Clarke, Chang, & Ferrarini, 2024; Tassi et al., 2023; Teeuw et al., 2019). However, a key challenge has been disentangling true individual differences from session-to-session variability and measurement noise, which can obscure interpretation of genetic and environmental contributions. In this study, we analyze twin fMRI data while explicitly accounting for measurement error derived from repeated scans. This approach increases the number of functional couplings that can be reliably analyzed and yields more accurate estimates of genetic and environmental effects. We also show that methodological choices (e.g., scan duration and brain parcellation granularity) substantially influence the reliability and interpretability of these estimates. By integrating results across resting-state and multiple task conditions, we demonstrate that genetic and environmental influences are not randomly distributed but instead organize into cohesive, hierarchical brain networks. –2– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Overall, our framework provides a principled and practical approach to improve reliability in classical twin models applied to brain connectomics and offers new insights into how genes and environment shape large-scale brain function. 

1 INTRODUCTION 

Twin studies provide a principled framework to quantify the genetic and environmental contributions to inter-individual variability in human traits, including brain structure and function (Blokland, Mosing, Ver-weij, & Medland, 2013; Boomsma, Busjahn, & Peltonen, 2002; Polderman et al., 2015). By contrasting monozygotic (MZ) and dizygotic (DZ) twins, classical variance component models partition phenotypic variance into additive genetic (A), dominant genetic (D), shared environmental (C), and non-shared envi-ronmental (E) components. These models have been widely used to estimate heritability across behavioral, cognitive, and neuroimaging phenotypes (Craig, Calais-Ferreira, Umstad, & Buchwald, 2020; Hagenbeek et al., 2023; van Dongen, Slagboom, Draisma, Martin, & Boomsma, 2012). A key assumption of classical twin models is that measurement error is negligible and can therefore be subsumed within the non-shared environment component (E). While this assumption may be reasonable for highly controlled phenotypes (e.g., anthropometric measures), it is not tenable for functional connec-tivity (FC) derived from fMRI. This concern has been previously highlighted in other domains, including nutritional assessment (Ulijaszek & Kerr, 1999) and digital anthropometry using 3D optical measure-ments (Mocini et al., 2023), where measurement error can substantially bias inference. FC estimates are inherently affected by multiple sources of variability, including physiological noise, head motion, scanner instabilities, preprocessing choices, scan length and parcellation granularity. Consequently, the E com-ponent conflates true individual-specific environmental influences with measurement-related variability, limiting interpretability and introducing bias into variance decomposition (Ge, Holmes, Buckner, Smoller, & Sabuncu, 2017; Neale & Cardon, 1992; Zuo & Xing, 2014). Functional connectivity (FC) derived from fMRI BOLD time series is inherently subject to multiple sources of variability that extend beyond underlying neural differences, distinguishing it from more stable phenotypic traits (Murphy, Birn, & Bandettini, 2013; Smith et al., 2011). Measurement error arises from physiological fluctuations, head motion, and scanner- and sequence-related instabilities (e.g., drift, thermal –3– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

noise), as well as sampling limitations such as short scan duration, low signal-to-noise ratio, and temporal autocorrelation (Bianciardi et al., 2009; Greve et al., 2013; Liu, 2016). Additional variability is introduced by analytical choices, including preprocessing pipelines and their associated degrees of freedom, nuisance regression strategies (e.g., with or without global signal regression), parcellation granularity, temporal filtering, and the choice of FC estimator, all of which can systematically alter connectivity estimates even when applied to the same data. Beyond these technical factors, FC also exhibits state-dependent variability related to fluctuations in arousal, alertness, compliance, and ongoing cognition, leading to differences across repeated measurements within the same individual (Chang et al., 2016; Gu, Han, & Liu, 2019; Laumann et al., 2017; Wang, Ong, Patanaik, Zhou, & Chee, 2016). As a result, FC variability reflects a composite of measurement noise and genuine within-subject fluc-tuations, yielding reliability that is heterogeneous across both individual functional connections and large-scale network organization. This complexity has motivated a parallel line of work on connectome fin-gerprinting, which quantifies the extent to which whole-brain FC patterns retain subject-specific structure across sessions and conditions, thereby isolating their trait-like component amid multiple sources of vari-ability (Abbas et al., 2023; Finn et al., 2015; Horien, Shen, Scheinost, & Constable, 2019). Building on this perspective, we explicitly model this variability by estimating edgewise (functional couplings) mea-surement error across repeated acquisitions, enabling a principled quantification of reliability at the level of the whole functional connectome. Individual differences in FC have also been examined using twin designs, which probe the reliability and heritability of functional networks in both resting-state and task fMRI (Abbas et al., 2023; Hulshoff Pol et al., 2004; Jansen, Mous, White, Posthuma, & Polderman, 2015; Pourmotabbed et al., 2024; Tassi et al., 2023; Yao, Brown, Yang, & Biswal, 2023). Twin-model approaches applied to FC and related network features consistently indicate that portions of the connectome are heritable, often emphasizing additive genetic effects (A), while comparatively fewer studies explicitly characterize contributions from shared environment (C), dominant genetic effects (D), or unique environment (E) (Blokland et al., 2008; Col-clough et al., 2017; Dominguez et al., 2018; Glahn et al., 2010; Teeuw et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2024). However, most prior work does not explicitly model measurement error, instead subsuming it within the non-shared environment term (E), thereby inflating estimates of unique environmental contributions. –4– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Test–retest designs (here, repeated scans) offer a means to disentangle session-level variability—arising from participant state and scanner-related factors—from stable subject-level connectivity patterns (Zuo & Xing, 2014). Accordingly, recent studies have begun to leverage repeated measurements to separate within-subject fluctuations from more stable components when estimating the heritability of resting-state connectivity, underscoring the importance of repeated acquisitions for more accurate interpretation of A, C, D, and E (Chen, Moraczewski, & Taylor, 2025; Ge et al., 2017). In this context, explicitly quan-tifying measurement error provides a critical step toward disentangling true biological variability from acquisition- and session-driven noise in connectome-based heritability analyses. Here, we extend the clas-sical twin framework to explicitly incorporate measurement error estimated from test–retest fMRI data (see Figure 1 for illustrative diagram). Using monozygotic and dizygotic twins with repeated scans from the Young Adult Human Connectome Project dataset, we estimate variance components at the level of individual functional couplings across resting-state and task conditions. We further evaluate how scan de-sign, including parcellation granularity and scan length, influences the proportion of couplings for which ACE/ADE models are applicable. To integrate results across conditions, we construct whole-brain vari-ance component matrices using a minimum-error criterion and examine their organization using multilayer community detection across resolution scales. Together, this framework enables a functional connectome-wide characterization of genetic, environmental, and measurement-related contributions and their organ-ization into large-scale brain networks. We hypothesize that (i) explicit modeling of measurement er-ror improves the reliability and interpretability of variance component estimates; (ii) the applicability of ACE/ADE models depends on scan design and parcellation granularity; and (iii) genetic and environmen-tal influences on functional connectivity exhibit hierarchical modular organization across conditions. –5– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Figure 1: Workflow: Functional coupling is extracted for twin 1 and twin 2 for all the MZ and DZ twin pairs. Correlation ( rM Z , rDZ , rT R ) is computed on the extracted couplings from each FC, thus computing 

A, C, D, E and E (see equations at Methods Section 2.5). The process is repeated for each coupling. This method is performed for all fMRI conditions resulting in eight (rest + 7 tasks) different matrices of A, C,

D, E and E. rT R refers to the correlation between functional couplings acquired from Test scan and Retest scan. 

2 METHODS 

2.1 Human Connectome Project Young-Adult dataset 

In this work, we used data from the Human Connectome Project Young Adult dataset ( 1, 200 partici-pants) (Van Essen et al., 2013). All procedures were approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of Washington University in St. Louis, and all participants provided written informed consent prior to partic-ipation. We extracted three different subsets. The first consists of 426 unrelated participants ( 223 women, mean age: 28 .67 years old, range: 22 −36 ), while the remaining subsets include 116 pairs of Monozygotic –6– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Group Sex (M/F) Age (mean ± SD) Education (mean ± SD) 

Unrelated 223/203 28.67 ± 3.78 14.99 ± 1.77 MZ 132/100 29.27 ± 3.34 14.98 ± 1.83 DZ 70/56 28.69 ± 3.43 15.29 ± 1.62 Table 1: Demographic characteristics of the study sample across unrelated individuals, monozygotic (MZ), and dizygotic (DZ) twins. Values are presented as counts or mean ± standard deviation. There were no significant differences across groups in sex distribution ( p = 0 .51 ), age ( p = 0 .11 ), or years of education (p = 0 .22 ). (MZ) twins and 63 pairs of Dizygotic (DZ) twins. All DZ pairs of twins were of the same sex, to minimize differences in shared environment between the MZ and DZ cohorts (Blokland et al., 2013). fMRI data included both resting state (RS) and seven tasks: emotion processing (EM), gambling (GAM), language (LAN), motor (MOT), relational processing (REL), social cognition (SOC), and working memory (WM). For simplicity, we refer to the resting state and the tasks as fMRI conditions, or simply conditions. For each condition, participants underwent two sessions corresponding to two different acquisitions (left-to-right or LR, and right-to-left or RL). The resting-state scans (“REST 1” and “REST 2”) were acquired on two different days for a total of four sessions. Only the two sessions from REST 1 were utilized in this work. 

> 2.2 Brain parcellation granularity

In this work, we have used a hierarchical collection of functional brain atlases of the cortex, known as the Schaefer parcellations (Schaefer et al., 2018), based on resting-state fMRI data from 1, 489 participants. The Schaefer parcellations used surface alignment but are available both in volumetric and grayordinate space and at ten granularity levels: 100 −1000 in steps of 100 . The Schaefer parcellations are available both in volumetric and grayordinate space. Since the grayordinate versions of the parcellations are in the same surface space as the HCP fMRI data, it is straightforward to map them onto the fMRI data. Furthermore, the alignment between the fMRI data and the Schaefer parcellations is improved when using surface-mapping. Thus, we used the surface-based mapping to map the 100 −900 granularity parcellations –7– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

onto the fMRI data. At the time of the data processing for this study, we could not map the 1000 Schaefer parcellation successfully for the HCP Young Adult dataset. 

> 2.3 Preprocessing of the Young Adult HCP dataset

A “minimal” preprocessing pipeline from the HCP was employed (Glasser et al., 2013), comprising arti-fact removal, motion correction, and registration to standard template. Full details can be found in earlier publications (Glasser et al., 2013; Smith, Beckmann, Andersson, et al., 2013). We added the following steps to the “minimal” pipeline. For resting-state fMRI data we: (i) regressed out the global gray matter signal from the voxel time courses (Power et al., 2014), (ii) applied a first-order Butterworth bandpass filter in the forward and the reverse directions [ 0.001 −0.08 Hz (Power et al., 2014); MATLAB functions butter and filtfilt], and (iii) z-scored and averaged, per brain regions, the voxel time courses, excluding any outlier time points falling outside three standard deviation from the mean (workbench software, wb command -cifti-parcellate). For task-fMRI, we performed the same steps, but applied a wider frequency range for the bandpass filter ( 0.001 −0.25 Hz ) (Amico, Arenas, & Go˜ ni, 2019), since the optimal frequency range for task fMRI data is still unclear (Cole, Bassett, Power, Braver, & Petersen, 2014). 

> 2.4 Estimation of whole-brain functional connectomes

Functional connectivity between two brain regions ( q1 and q2) was estimated using Pearson’s correlation coefficient (MATLAB command corr): 

r =

> m

X

> i=1

(q1(i) − ¯q1)( q2(i) − ¯q2)

σ1σ2

(1) where 

r is the Pearson’s correlation coefficient. 

q1(i) and q2(i) are the ith elements of q1 and q2, respectively. 

¯q1 and ¯q2 are the sample means of q1 and q2, respectively. 

σ1 and σ2 are the standard deviations of q1 and q2, respectively. Computing the correlations between all pairs of brain regions results into a symmetric correlation matrix of size m × m, where m is the number of brain regions for a given parcellation. We refer to this object as a whole-brain functional connectome (FC). For each participant, we computed an FC for each of the –8– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

two sessions (also referred to as test-retest), each fMRI condition (resting state and all tasks), and each parcellation granularity ( 100 −900 ). 

> 2.5 The classical twin model

The classical twin model is a statistical framework that, for any phenotype, compares the similarity of MZ twins and DZ twins to partition the variance of a trait into additive and dominant genetics and shared and unique environment (Blokland et al., 2013). MZ twins are genetically identical while DZ twins share about 50% of their genetic material. In both cases, it is expected that MZ and DZ twins have a large portion of shared environment. By comparing similarities within MZ and DZ twins, the classical twin model partitions the phenotype variance of a trait into the following four components: i) Additive genetic effects ( A) represent variance attributable to the cumulative, linear effects of individual alleles inherited from parents; ii) Shared environmental effects ( C) capture variance arising from environmental factors that make twins raised together more similar to each other; iii) Dominant genetic effects ( D) represent variance due to non-additive interactions between alleles at the same genetic locus. iv) Non-shared environmental effects ( E) capture variance due to environmental influences unique to each individual, notably including measurement error. Because this is a partition of phenotypic variance, the sum of all four components equals to one. Correlation between monozygotic (MZ) twins can be attributed to additive genetic effects ( A), shared environment ( C), and dominant genetic effects ( D), such that the expected correlation can be expressed as rM Z = A + C + D. In contrast, dizygotic (DZ) twins share on average 50% of their additive genetic variance and 25% of their dominant genetic variance, along with shared environmental factors, yielding the expression rDZ = 0 .5A + C + 0 .25 D (Blokland et al., 2013). This leads to a set of three equations and 4 unknowns: 

rM Z = A + C + DrDZ = 0 .5A + C + 0 .25 DA + C + D + E = 1 

Because the classical twin model includes four variance components but only three independent equa-tions, it is not possible to estimate all components simultaneously. To address this limitation, the model –9– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Figure 2: Model selection (ACE vs ADE) in the Classical Twin Model based on comparison between MZ and DZ twin correlations ( rM Z and rDZ respectively. When the condition rDZ ≥ 0.5rM Z is not met, systematic use of ACE model leads to inflated additive heritability estimations. estimates either C or D, as these terms are negatively confounded (Blokland et al., 2013; Tassi et al., 2023). Shared environmental effects ( C) contribute similarly to monozygotic (MZ) and dizygotic (DZ) twins, tending to increase both rM Z and rDZ , while dominant genetic effects ( D) disproportionately in-crease rM Z relative to rDZ . Consequently, when 0 < r DZ < r MZ ≤ 2rDZ , the ACE model is selected, implying negligible D. In contrast, when 0 < 2rDZ < r MZ < 4rDZ , the ADE model is selected, implying negligible C (Blokland et al., 2013). A schematic summary of this selection procedure is shown in Fig-ure 2. Figure 3 further illustrates, for a representative functional coupling, the estimation of rM Z and rDZ 

and the corresponding variance component decomposition. In consequence, the ACE model equations are as follows: 

A = 2( rM Z − rDZ )

C = 2 rDZ − rM Z 

E = 1 − rM Z 

such that 

A + C + E = 1 

–10– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Analogously, the ADE equations are as follows: 

A = 4 rDZ − rM Z 

D = 2 rM Z − 4rDZ 

E = 1 − rM Z 

such that 

A + D + E = 1 

Our first step consisted of estimating the above-mentioned factors for traits. In our study, those are the functional couplings. Therefore, for each functional coupling, and for MZ and DZ twin pairs separately, we computed the Pearson’s correlation coefficient between twin 1 and twin 2 in each pair. As a result, we obtain zygosity specific correlations rM Z and rDZ . In order to obtain reliable estimations of rM Z and rDZ ,we implemented an iterative sampling procedure. For each iteration: i) 80% of the twin-pairs (MZ or DZ) were randomly selected. ii) for each pair of twins, labels ’twin1’ and ’twin2’ were randomly assigned. iii) Pearson’s correlation coefficients between ’twin1’ and ’twin2’ functional couplings were obtained. This process was repeated 500 times (Figure S1), producing a distribution of correlation coefficients. The final correlation estimate was obtained as the mean of this distribution and was then used to estimate A, C, D

and E for each coupling using above equations (Figure 1) 

> 2.6 Community detection on ACE/ADE components using Multiplex Networks.

In this study, we use the concept of multiplex networks to assess the organization into communities of each variance component of ACE/ADE models across different resolutions. A multiplex network consists of m layers sharing a common set of N nodes, where each layer encodes a distinct type of interaction (De Domenico, Granell, Porter, & Arenas, 2016; Kivel¨ a et al., 2014). Formally, the network is represented as M = ( G, E ), where G = {ga | a = 1 , . . . , m } denotes the set of layers, and each layer ga = ( N, E a)

contains the same node set and a layer-specific set of intra-layer edges. Inter-layer connectivity is defined by edges eab linking corresponding mirror nodes across layers, such that intra-layer edges ( a = b) capture layer-specific interactions, while inter-layer edges ( a̸ = b) encode couplings between interaction types. We consider ordinal multiplex networks, in which inter-layer connections exist only between adjacent layers and only between mirror nodes (Mucha, Richardson, Macon, Porter, & Onnela, 2010). The resulting –11– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Figure 3: Estimation of variance components using twin correlations: Histograms show sampling dis-tributions of Pearson correlation coefficients (r) for monozygotic (MZ) and dizygotic (DZ) twin pairs, obtained via repeated resampling for two representative functional couplings during resting state. Insets show scatter plots for a single illustrative sampling instance, depicting twin 1 versus twin 2 values for MZ and DZ pairs. In the top row, the sampled correlations ( rM Z = 0 .48 , r DZ = 0 .36 ) satisfy the ACE model criteria, yielding variance component estimates of additive genetics ( A = 2( rM Z − rDZ ) = 0 .24 ), shared environment ( C = 2 rDZ − rM Z = 0 .24 ), and unique environment ( E = 0 .52 ). In the bottom row, the sampled correlations ( rM Z = 0 .58 , r DZ = 0 .2) satisfy the ADE model criteria, yielding A = 0 .24 ,dominant genetic effects ( D = 0 .34 ), and E = 0 .42 . Bar plots summarize the corresponding variance component estimates for each example. –12– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

supra-adjacency matrix has a block structure with intra-layer adjacency matrices Aa on the diagonal and inter-layer couplings ωI on the off-diagonal blocks. For example, adjacency matrix A for m-layer multiplex network can be written as; 

A =



A1 ωI 0 · · · 0

ωI A2 ωI · · · 00 ωI A3 . . . ...... ... . . . . . . ωI 

0 0 · · · ωI Am



,

where Aa is the N × N adjacency matrix corresponding to layer a, I denotes the identity matrix, and ω

represents the inter-layer coupling strength. Communities describe groups of nodes more strongly connected to each other than to nodes outside of their community, as compared to a null model representing what would be expected in a network of similar size and density with randomly distributed connections (Newman, 2006). Modularity describes a formal measurement of this (Newman & Girvan, 2004), which can be used in iterative processes of finding a partition of a network with an optimal set of community assignments. In the current study the GenLouvain community detection algorithm is used (Mucha et al., 2010), which involves the following multiplex modularity measurement that is formulated to work on multilayer networks: 

Q = 12μ

X

> ijsr

[( Aijs − γs

kis kjs 

2ms

)δsr + δij ωjsr ]δ(gis , g jr )

Here μ is the total edge weight of the network, Aijs is the adjacency matrix between nodes i and j at layer s. kis kjs  

> 2ms

describes the matrix of expected weights under the null model. The resolution parameter γs

sets the weight of intralayer edges, and ωjsr sets the weight of inter layer edges. g refers to community assignments: gis and gjr are the community assignments of node i in layer s, and node j in layer r,respectively. δ describes the Kronecker delta, which for δ(gis , g jr ) is 1 if is = jr , and 0 if is ̸ = jr .GenLouvain community detection algorithm was applied to A, C, E and E multiplex networks. To identify stable community structure across multiple resolutions, we implemented a multilayer con-sensus community detection approach (Figure 4). For a given matrix (A, C, D, E, E), we vary the resolution parameter γ across a predefined range. As shown in Figure S2, the number of detected communities in-–13– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

creases with γ, with component-specific stabilization patterns. In particular, the measurement error ( E)component exhibits a clear plateau at γ = 1 .69 , which we use to define the upper bound of the resolution range for the multilayer network. The lower bound is chosen as the smallest γ at which all components exhibit at least two communities. For each γ value, the Louvain algorithm is executed 10,000 times to account for its stochasticity. The resulting partitions are then combined into a consensus matrix, in which each entry represents the proportion of runs in which a given pair of nodes is assigned to the same com-munity (Lancichinetti & Fortunato, 2012). To ensure robustness, the consensus matrix is thresholded at 

0.25 , retaining only node pairs that co-occurred in at least 25 % of runs. The thresholded matrix, termed as the agreement matrix, captures the stable co-assignment structure at that specific γ value. Repeating this procedure across all γ values produces a series of agreement matrices, each representing the net-work’s modular organization at a different resolution. These agreement matrices are then treated as layers in a multiplex network, where each layer corresponding to a particular γ value, and inter-layer coupling preserves the identity of nodes across layers. Multilayer community detection is then performed on this multilayer structure to extract communities that are coherent across resolutions (Mucha et al., 2010). Fi-nally, a hierarchical clustering procedure is applied to the multislice partitions to reveal nested modular organization, yielding a hierarchy of communities that captures the network’s structure from fine to coarse grained levels (see Fig. 4). –14– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Figure 4: Multilayer consensus community detection pipeline: Community detection is repeated across a range of resolution parameters ( γ) to generate consensus matrices summarizing stable node co-assignments. Thresholded consensus matrices are treated as layers of a multiplex network with ordinal in-terlayer coupling, and multislice community detection is applied to identify communities coherent across resolutions. Hierarchical clustering of multislice partitions reveals nested modular organization. 

2.7 Comparing partitions via Adjusted Rand Index 

To quantify the similarity between community partitions derived from variance component connectivity matrices and functional network organization (Yeo et al., 2011), we employed the Adjusted Rand Index –15– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

(ARI). ARI is a measure of similarity between two partitions that evaluates the consistency of pairwise assignments of elements to clusters while accounting for agreement expected under random labeling (Hu-bert & Arabie, 1985). Mathematically, 

ARI = Index − E[Index] Max Index − E[Index] (2) where Index denotes the observed Rand index between two partitions, E[Index] is the expected agreement under random labeling, and Max Index is the maximum possible agreement, equal to 1. In the present study, ARI was used to compare community labels obtained from the additive genetic (A), common environment (C), dominant genetic (D), unique environment (E), and measurement error (E) components across the seven Yeo functional network labels. This approach enables an assessment of whether variance component specific modular organization aligns with known functional network struc-ture, independent of the number or size of modules. ARI values close to zero indicate weak correspon-dence, whereas negative values indicate agreement lower than expected by chance. 

3 RESULTS 

> 3.1 Heritable vs. Environmental Proportion in Phenotypic Traits

To contextualize the heritability estimates of functional connectivity, we quantified genetic and environ-mental contributions to a set of demographic, cognitive, and behavioral traits in twins (Van Essen et al., 2013). Cognitive measures in the Human Connectome Project (HCP) are primarily derived from the NIH Toolbox Cognition Battery, a standardized and validated framework for assessing multiple domains of cognitive function across the lifespan (Gershon et al., 2013; Weintraub et al., 2013). Specifically, we ex-amined height, weight, fluid intelligence, episodic memory, processing speed, language reading/decoding, and executive function (including cognitive flexibility and inhibition). Fluid intelligence was assessed us-ing the Penn Matrix Reasoning Test (PMAT24), which measures abstract reasoning and problem-solving ability independent of acquired knowledge. Episodic memory was measured using the Picture Sequence Memory Test, which evaluates the ability to encode and recall sequences of visual information. Process-ing speed was assessed using the Pattern Comparison Processing Speed Test, reflecting the efficiency of visual information processing. Executive function was evaluated using tasks such as the Dimensional Change Card Sort and Flanker Task, which measure cognitive flexibility and inhibitory control, respec-–16– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Trait rMZ rDZ A C D E Model Height 0.94 0.76 0.35 0.58 – 0.06 ACE Weight 0.77 0.52 0.56 0.23 – 0.19 ACE BMI 0.65 0.32 0.63 – 0.01 0.35 ADE Episodic Memory 0.50 0.07 – – – – Epistasis Executive Function – Cognitive 0.43 0.13 0.22 – 0.02 0.75 ADE Executive Function – Inhibition 0.44 0.09 – – – – Epistasis Fluid Intelligence 0.52 0.34 0.66 0.01 – 0.32 ACE Language Reading/Decoding 0.70 0.49 0.37 0.31 – 0.32 ACE Processing Speed 0.33 0.07 – – – – Epistasis ASR Internalizing Raw Score 0.41 0.11 0.03 – 0.37 0.58 ADE ASR Externalizing Raw Score 0.40 0.06 – – – – Epistasis Table 2: For each trait, the correlations between monozygotic ( rM Z ) and dizygotic ( rDZ ) twin pairs are reported, along with the estimated variance components attributable to additive genetic effects (A), com-mon environmental effects (C), dominant genetic effects (D), and unique environmental effects (E). The only applicable model (ACE, ADE, or epistasis-dominant patterns) is indicated in the final column based on standard twin-model assumptions and observed correlation patterns. Dashes indicate components not included or not identifiable under the selected model. –17– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

tively, while language ability was assessed using the Oral Reading Recognition Test, capturing reading and decoding skills. In addition, behavioral and emotional functioning was assessed using the Achenbach System of Empirically Based Assessment (ASR), where internalizing scores reflect anxiety/depressive and withdrawn symptom dimensions, and externalizing scores reflect rule-breaking and aggressive behavior profiles (Achenbach & Rescorla, 2003). For each trait, we computed Pearson correlation coefficients separately for monozygotic (MZ) and dizygotic (DZ) twin pairs, yielding zygosity-specific correlations ( rM Z and rDZ ); Table 2). The distri-bution of all demographic, cognitive, and behavioral traits across the full sample of MZ and DZ twins is shown in Figure S4 . Classical twin modeling was applied only to traits satisfying rM Z > r DZ > 0.When 2rDZ < r M Z < 4rDZ , we assumed contributions from additive and dominant genetic factors along with unique environmental influences, and thus applied the ADE model, decomposing variance into ad-ditive genetic (A), dominant genetic (D), and unique environmental (E) components. Conversely, when 

rDZ < r M Z < 2rDZ , we applied the ACE model, partitioning variance into additive genetic (A), shared environmental (C), and unique environmental (E) components. Cases where rM Z > 4rDZ were not ad-equately captured by either model and were interpreted as indicative of epistatic (non-additive) genetic interactions (Tassi et al., 2023; van Dongen et al., 2012). Twin correlations revealed distinct genetic architectures across traits (Table 2). Height and weight ex-hibited strong heritability, with notable contributions from shared environmental factors. Among cognitive traits, fluid intelligence and language/reading decoding showed substantial additive genetic influences (A = 0.66 and 0.37 , respectively), consistent with an ACE model. In contrast, executive function (inhibition) and processing speed were better explained by an ADE model, reflecting contributions from both additive and dominant genetic effects. Episodic memory displayed a marked discrepancy between rM Z = 0 .47 

and rDZ = 0 .07 , a pattern inconsistent with ACE or ADE assumptions and suggestive of epistatic inter-actions. ASR internalizing ( rM Z = 0 .41 , rDZ = 0 .11 ) and externalizing ( rM Z = 0 .40 , rDZ = 0 .06 )scores similarly exhibited low DZ correlations relative to MZ; however, internalizing was consistent with an ADE model reflecting non-additive genetic effects, whereas externalizing was indicative of epistatic in-teractions. Overall, demographic traits were predominantly influenced by additive genetic effects, whereas cognitive traits exhibited a more complex architecture involving additive, dominant, and epistatic genetic contributions. Full estimates of A, C, and E components for each trait are reported in Table 2. –18– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Figure 5: (a) Mean edgewise correlations ( rT R , rM Z , rDZ ) for resting-state as a function of parcellation granularity. (b) Proportion of negative correlations across all functional couplings for resting-state, shown for rT R , rM Z , and rDZ as a function of parcellation granularity. (c) Violin plots of test–retest reliability (rT R ) and monozygotic twin similarity ( rM Z ) for resting-state at parcellation granularity 100. (d) Com-parison of classical and extended estimates of non-shared environment for resting-state at parcellation granularity 100: classical ACE estimate ( 1 − rM Z ), corrected estimate from ACE E (rT R − rM Z ), and measurement error ( 1 − rT R ). 

3.2 Extension of ACE and ADE models 

In classical ACE and ADE frameworks, the non-shared environment component ( E) is typically esti-mated as 1 − rM Z , where rM Z denotes the similarity between monozygotic (MZ) twins. This formulation conflates true individual-specific environmental variance with measurement-related variability. To disen-tangle these contributions, we extend the classical twin models by explicitly incorporating a measurement error term derived from within-subject test–retest data, yielding the ACE E and ADE E formulations. In this framework, test–retest reliability ( rT R ) defines the upper bound of variance attributable to biological and environmental factors, while the residual variance, 1 − rT R , reflects measurement error arising from –19– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

scanner noise, preprocessing variability, and other non-systematic sources. Accordingly, we redefine the non-shared environment as E = rT R − rM Z , capturing only reliable variance not explained by genetic or shared environmental effects, and explicitly model measurement error as E = 1 − rT R .When evaluating the effect of parcellation granularity, we considered two complementary metrics: the mean correlations ( rT R , rM Z , and rDZ ) across all functional couplings, and the proportion of negative correlations. The former reflects signal preservation, whereas the latter serves as an indicator of noise, as negative values are not expected for rT R , rM Z , or rDZ . While test–retest reliability ( rT R ) remains largely stable across parcellation granularities, the average monozygotic ( rM Z ) and dizygotic ( rDZ ) twin correla-tions decrease as granularity increases (Figure 5A). Concurrently, the proportion of negative correlations increases with finer parcellations, particularly for rDZ , whereas rT R and rM Z remain comparatively stable (Figure 5B). Based on these observations in this sample, a parcellation of 100 regions was the best option to maximize mean correlations, while minimizing the presence of negative correlations. Figure 5d illustrates the resulting variance decomposition under the ACE E model. Notably, the con-ventional estimate of non-shared environment ( 1 − rM Z ) systematically exceeds the corrected estimate (rT R − rM Z ), indicating inflation due to unmodeled measurement error. By incorporating rT R , the pro-posed framework separates true environmental effects from noise, providing a more interpretable partition of variance. Overall, this extension highlights that the traditional ACE/ADE models overestimates en-vironmental contributions by attributing unreliable variance to E. In contrast, the ACE E formulation constrains interpretable variance through rT R and isolates measurement-related variability via E.–20– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Figure 6: Flowchart illustrating the criteria for detecting applicable functional couplings under the ACE E

and ADE E models based on monozygotic (MZ) and dizygotic (DZ) twin correlations. Depending on the relationships between rM Z and rDZ , couplings are assigned to the ACE E, ADE E, or epistasis regimes. Each branch specifies the corresponding variance component estimates ( A, C, D, E) and measurement error term ( E). This framework also identifies couplings for which classical twin modeling assumptions are not satisfied, and thus no variance decomposition is applied. 

3.3 Model-Based Categorization of Functional Couplings under Extended Twin Framework 

Building on the extended twin modeling framework, we next quantified the genetic and environmental contributions to individual functional couplings across all fMRI conditions. For each pairwise coupling, we computed the Pearson correlation between twin 1 and twin 2 separately for monozygotic (MZ) and dizygotic (DZ) pairs, yielding zygosity-specific correlations rM Z and rDZ (Figure 1). This procedure was performed independently for each fMRI condition. Only couplings satisfying the criterion rM Z > r DZ > 0 were retained for further analysis; all oth-ers were excluded and labeled as not applicable. Among the retained couplings, three distinct regimes emerged (Figure 6): –21– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

(1) For couplings satisfying 0 < r DZ < r M Z ≤ 2rDZ , we applied the ACE E model, estimating additive genetic ( A), shared environmental ( C), unique environmental ( E), and measurement error ( E) components. (2) For couplings satisfying 0 < 2rDZ < r M Z < 4rDZ , we applied the ADE E model, estimating additive genetic ( A), dominant genetic ( D), unique environmental ( E), and measurement error ( E) com-ponents. (3) For couplings where rM Z > 4rDZ > 0, the assumptions underlying classical twin models are vio-lated, precluding variance decomposition under ACE E or ADE E. These cases are interpreted as reflecting non-additive gene–gene interactions (epistasis). The distribution of functional couplings attributed to A, C, D, E, and E across all fMRI conditions are summarized in Figure 7. Across both resting-state and task conditions, the ACE E model accounts for a larger fraction of couplings than the ADE E model, indicating that most functional couplings are primarily influenced by additive genetic and environmental factors rather than dominant genetic effects. Neverthe-less, ACE E and ADE E explain comparable proportions of couplings across task conditions, suggesting that additive and dominant genetic influences contribute consistently across different brain states. Cou-plings classified as epistatic are also observed in both resting-state and task conditions, consistent with the presence of non-additive gene–gene interactions. It is noteworthy that a substantial proportion of couplings are classified as not applicable (N/A), as they do not satisfy the heritability criterion ( rM Z > r DZ > 0; see Figure 7). This fraction reaches up to 80% in certain task conditions (e.g., Emotion and Motor), with most tasks exhibiting approximately 70% non-applicable couplings, whereas the proportion is lowest for resting-state data (20% approximately). This analysis was performed separately on test (white bars) and retest (black bars) sessions. The proportions of couplings across categories are highly consistent between sessions for all fMRI conditions, indicating robust estimates. However, the specific couplings classified as applicable or non-applicable show minor variability between sessions. To obtain more stable estimates, we averaged model outputs (A,C,D,E, E)across test and retest sessions (gray bars in Figure 7). This aggregation was restricted to functional cou-plings for which both test and retest data satisfied the same model classification (ACE E or ADE E). Under this constraint, averaging led to an increased number of couplings classified under the ACE E and ADE E

–22– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Figure 7: Functional couplings attributed to each variance component (A, C, D, E, error term E, and epis-tasis) across fMRI conditions. ACE E and ADE E average results were restricted to functional couplings for which both test and retest data satisfied the same model classification (ACE E or ADE E). models, while reducing the proportion of epistatic and non-applicable couplings across all conditions. All subsequent analyses are therefore based on these averaged estimates. 

3.4 Distribution of Genetic and Environmental Variance Components along the Functional Connectome 

After computing rM Z and rDZ for each functional coupling and assigning couplings to the appropriate model, we estimated the corresponding variance components. For couplings satisfying the ACE E criteria, variance proportions were computed as A = 2( rM Z − rDZ ), C = 2 rDZ − rM Z , E = rT R − rM Z ,and E = 1 − rT R . For couplings classified under the ADE E model, components were estimated as 

A = 4 rDZ − rM Z , D = 2 rM Z − 4rDZ , E = rT R − rM Z , and E = 1 − rT R . This procedure was applied to every functional coupling, yielding full-brain matrices (at each parcellation scale) for each variance –23– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Figure 8: Left: Effect of scan length on the proportion of non-applicable couplings. The fraction of couplings excluded from the extended twin model decreases as scan length increases. Task conditions (blue squares) have shorter acquisitions (100–400 time points) and exhibit a higher proportion of non-applicable couplings, whereas resting-state (black circles), characterized by longer scan durations, shows substantially fewer excluded couplings. Right: Difference in the number of non-applicable couplings for task and resting state data at equivalent scan lengths. component ( A, C, D, E, and E). As analyses were performed across both resting-state and task fMRI conditions, this resulted in eight matrices per component, one per condition. Figure 1 illustrates the analysis workflow and presents the resulting component matrices for the resting-state condition, highlighting the distribution of genetic, environmental and measurement error related contributions across functional couplings. The matrix A identifies couplings primarily driven by additive genetic effects, reflecting heritability. The matrix C captures shared environmental influences common to both twins, while the matrix D reflects dominant (non-additive) genetic effects. The matrix E represents the variance attributable to unique environmental influences after accounting for reliability, and the matrix 

E quantifies the measurement error and residual noise not explained by twin similarity. Together, these component-specific networks provide a characterization of the genetic and environmental architecture underlying brain organization for the entire functional connectome. 

> 3.5 Integration Across fMRI Conditions based on minimum error

–24– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Figure 9: A, C, D, E, and measurement error ( E) matrices obtained by integrating all fMRI conditions at parcellation granularity 100. For each functional coupling, the estimate corresponding to the condition with the lowest E was selected as the most reliable value. Applying this minimum-error selection across all couplings yielded merged whole-brain matrices (A, C, D, E) that integrate information across conditions while minimizing measurement noise. The bottom-right panel shows the edge-wise distribution of fMRI conditions contributing the minimum-error estimates. –25– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Figure 7 shows that the fraction of non-applicable (N/A) couplings varies across resting-state and task conditions. While such variability may partly reflect differences in brain state, scan length also differs substantially across fMRI conditions in the HCP Young Adult dataset. Specifically, resting-state scan has the most time points ( 1190 ), whereas task scans range from 166 to 395 time points (Emotion = 166, Gambling = 243, Language = 306, Motor = 274, Relational = 222, Social = 264, Working Memory = 395). Prior work has demonstrated that longer fMRI acquisitions improve the reliability and stability of functional connectivity estimates and enhance the interpretability of network-level analyses (Abdul Wahab et al., 2022; Birn et al., 2013; Jarrahi, 2021; Ooi et al., 2025). To explicitly assess the effect of scan length, we quantified the proportion of N/A couplings in resting-state data while systematically truncating the time series in increments of 100 time points. In addition, we truncated resting-state data to match the duration of each task condition, enabling two complementary analyses: (i) characterization of the dependence of N/A proportion on scan length for resting-state; (ii) comparison of N/A proportions across resting-state and task conditions at matched scan lengths. As shown in Figure 8, the proportion of non-applicable couplings decreases with increasing scan length and differs between resting-state and task conditions. A multiple linear regression analysis confirmed that both scan length and condition (task vs. rest) are significant predictors reducing the percentage of non-applicable couplings ( p < 0.05 ). Consistent with this interpretation, truncating resting-state data to match task dura-tions yields N/A proportions that closely resemble those observed in several task conditions—particularly Emotion, Motor, Language, and Working Memory. Given the relatively small fraction of functional couplings for which ACE/ADE models are applicable within individual fMRI conditions (ranging from 25% to 38% for ACE and 8% to 21% for ADE; Figure 7), we integrated results across conditions using a minimum-error approach. For each variance component (A, C, D, E, and E), eight matrices were obtained corresponding to the eight fMRI conditions (resting state and seven tasks), yielding eight candidate estimates per functional coupling. We then selected, for each coupling, the estimate associated with the condition exhibiting the lowest measurement error ( E). Applying this procedure across all couplings produced combined A, C, D, and E matrices that retain, for each coupling, the most reliable estimate across conditions (Figure 9). As shown in Figure 9(f), resting-state data contribute the highest proportion of selected couplings (58%), followed by Social (10%) and –26– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Working Memory (9%). This distribution reflects the greater reliability afforded by longer resting-state acquisitions, while still incorporating task-specific information when it provides more stable estimates. 

> 3.6 Organization into functional modules is driven by phenotypic decomposition

To characterize the hierarchical organization of community structure in the additive genetic (A), shared en-vironmental (C), and dominant genetic (D) connectivity matrices, we applied a multi-resolution, multilayer community detection framework. For each variance component, a multiplex network was constructed with layers corresponding to different values of the resolution parameter ( γ), enabling the assessment of mod-ular organization across scales (see Section 2.6 and Figure 4). The resulting hierarchical community structures for the A, C, and D components are summarized in Figure 10. Multislice community detection was then applied to each multiplex network to identify modules that are consistent within and across γ values (Figure S3).The top row of Figure 10 displays the resulting dendrograms together with the corresponding reordered distance matrices for components A, C, and D. In these representations, colors in the dendrogram and blocks in the distance matrices denote groups of brain regions exhibiting similar community assignment patterns across resolutions. Darker blocks indicate sets of regions with highly stable co-assignment across scales, reflecting robust, component-specific modular organization. Figure 10 bottom row projects the final hierarchical modules for each component onto the cortical surface, revealing spatially distributed organizational patterns associated with additive genetics, shared environmental, and dominant genetics influences. Each component exhibits a distinct modular and hi-erarchical organization, indicating that genetic and environmental factors shape functional connectivity through partially overlapping yet component-specific organization into communities across multiple reso-lution scales. Figure 11 illustrates the hierarchical community organization of the refined unique environment (E), measurement error ( E), and the classical unique-environment component. The refined E component ex-hibits a hierarchical structure that is clearly distinct from both measurement error and the classical formu-lation. In particular, the classical E term closely resembles E, displaying fragmented, noise-like modular patterns, indicating that measurement error substantially dominates its structure. In contrast, the refined E component (left column) reveals coherent, spatially organized communities that are not apparent under –27– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Figure 10: Hierarchical community structure of additive genetics (A), shared environmental (C), and dominant genetics (D) components of the whole-brain functional connectome. For each component, the top panels display dendrograms derived from hierarchical clustering of brain regions based on the pairwise similarity of their community assignment patterns across resolution parameters, together with the corre-sponding distance matrices. Colored blocks denote groups of regions forming stable communities. The bottom panels project these hierarchical modules onto the lateral and medial cortical surfaces, illustrating the spatial organization of each component. Colors indicate distinct modules within each component in-dependently and are not comparable across components. –28– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Figure 11: Hierarchical community structure of the refined unique environment (E), measurement error (E), and classical unique-environment connectivity. For each component, the top panels display the den-drogram and corresponding distance matrix, illustrating the hierarchical clustering of brain regions based on the similarity of their modular organization across resolution scales. Notably, the classical unique-environment component exhibits patterns closely resembling those of measurement error, whereas the refined E component shows more coherent and structured modular organization. This contrast indicates that separating measurement error from the unique environment reveals meaningful environmental effects organized into communities that are otherwise obscured. –29– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Partitions Yeo7 A C D EYeo7 1 0.07 0.01 0.04 0.03 A 0.07 1 0.01 -0.02 0.009 C 0.01 0.01 1 -0.016 0.006 D 0.04 -0.02 -0.016 1 -0.005 E 0.03 0.009 0.006 -0.005 1Table 3: Pairwise similarity between component community partitions and functional network organiza-tion. Entries report the Adjusted Rand Index (ARI) between community labels derived from the additive genetic (A), shared environmental (C), dominant genetic (D), and unique environmental (E) components and the seven canonical functional networks. Diagonal entries equal unity by definition. Off-diagonal values quantify the degree of agreement between partitions, with values near zero indicating weak corre-spondence and negative values indicating agreement below chance. the classical formulation. This separation indicates that decomposing the traditional unique-environment term into true environmental influences (E) and measurement error ( E) is essential, as otherwise the error component obscures meaningful environmental structure. We next compared the partitions obtained by thresholding the hierarchical clustering (Figures 10 and 11) for each variance component. Results based on the Adjusted Rand Index (ARI; see Section subsection 2.7), summarized in Table 3, indicate that these partitions are distinct from one another and differ from canonical resting-state functional networks (Yeo et al., 2011). To further assess their relationship with canonical network organization, we quantified the extent to which each functional network is captured within single modules of each variance component (Table 4). Overall, most functional networks are broadly distributed across multiple modules and components. Notable exceptions include the frontoparietal network, for which 46% of regions are concentrated within a single module in the additive genetic (A) component, as well as the limbic (60%) and visual (47%) networks, which show greater concentration within single modules in the dominant genetic (D) component. –30– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

FNs/Partitions A(%) C(%) D(%) E(%) E(%) Visual 23.5 23.5 47.1 17.6 11.6 Somatomotor 42.8 35.7 21.4 35.7 21.4 Dorsal Attention 20 26.6 26.6 20 13.3 Ventral Attention 16.6 25 25 16.6 8.3 Limbic 20 40 60 20 20 Fronto Parietal 46.1 30.7 23.1 15.3 15.3 Default Mode Network 25 25 25 12.5 8.3 Table 4: For each functional network (rows), values indicate the maximum proportion of regions assigned to a single module within each connectivity component: additive genetics (A), shared environmental (C), dominant genetics (D), unique environmental (E), and measurement error ( E). 

4 DISCUSSION 

In this study, we developed and applied an extended twin modeling framework to disentangle genetic, environmental, and measurement-related contributions to functional brain connectivity. By incorporating test–retest reliability into classical ACE and ADE models, we separated true environmental variance from measurement noise, yielding more interpretable and refined estimates of unshared environment in brain networks. Functional couplings were classified into four regimes—ACE E, ADE E, epistatic, and non-applicable—by retaining only those satisfying classical twin model assumptions. For each functional coupling in the connectome, we decomposed variance into additive genetics (A), shared environmental (C), dominant genetics (D), unique environmental (E), and measurement error ( E)components across resting-state and seven task fMRI conditions. To obtain reliable estimates for the majority of couplings, these component matrices were integrated using a minimum-error selection strategy, whereby, for each coupling, the estimate associated with the lowest E was retained. This procedure yielded unified A, C, D, and E matrices that capture the most reliable estimates across conditions. Finally, applying a multilayer, multi-resolution community detection framework revealed that genetic and environmental –31– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

influences on functional connectivity are not randomly distributed, but instead organize into hierarchical, component-specific subnetworks across the cortex. Table 2 shows that demographic traits such as height and weight are predominantly influenced by ad-ditive genetic factors, whereas cognitive traits exhibit a more complex architecture involving additive, dominant, and epistatic effects. Notably, a substantial proportion of variance across cognitive traits is at-tributed to the non-shared environment ( E), a component that also encompasses measurement error. These findings highlight that failing to disentangle measurement variability from true environmental effects can inflate estimates of E and hinder the interpretation of environmental contributions. By incorporating test–retest reliability ( rT R ), we were able to explicitly partition measurement noise ( E) from genuine non-shared environmental variance, thereby improving the interpretability and validity of both heritability and environmental estimates. Recent work has emphasized the substantial impact of measurement error on heritability estimation, demonstrating that dissociating intra- and inter-subject variability can uncover genetic influences that are often obscured in conventional analyses. By explicitly modeling within-subject variability, these ap-proaches show that a portion of the genetic signal may be masked by measurement noise, leading to underestimation of true heritability in complex phenotypes such as functional brain connectivity (Chen et al., 2025; Ge et al., 2017). Consistent with this perspective, Figure 5 illustrates the practical impact of extending the ACE/ADE framework to the ACE E/ADE E models. Traditional formulations, in which 

E = 1 − rM Z , systematically overestimate environmental contributions because this term also captures measurement error. By redefining E = rT R − rM Z and explicitly modeling E = 1 − rT R , our framework separates true non-shared environmental variance from measurement error. This refinement yields more accurate estimates of environmental effects and indicates that a substantial fraction of what is typically attributed to “environment” in neuroimaging twin studies may instead reflect technical noise or instability in functional connectivity estimates. Beyond improving variance decomposition, the measurement error matrix estimated for each fMRI condition constitutes a valuable result in its own right, as it enables both a priori and a posteriori assess-ment of the expected reproducibility of findings derived from functional connectivity data. Specifically, it provides a principled framework to quantify the reliability of associations or predictive models linking connectivity patterns to participant-level domains, such as phenotypic traits or cognitive measures. This –32– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

has direct implications for widely used multivariate approaches, including connectome-based predictive modeling (Shen et al., 2017), partial least squares (Guerrero et al., 2025; McIntosh & Lobaugh, 2004), canonical correlation analysis, and tensor-based methods such as CP decomposition (Carvalho, Liu, Hare-zlak, G´ omez, & Go˜ ni, 2025). From an a priori perspective, the measurement error matrix can be used to restrict analyses to functional couplings with lower estimated error, thereby improving the stability of downstream inferences. Complementarily, from an a posteriori perspective, the uncertainty associated with model outputs—such as component loadings or connectivity weights—can be quantified using the same framework, enabling a more rigorous assessment of the reliability of derived solutions. Figure 6 summarizes the classification of functional couplings under the extended twin modeling frame-work. By applying conditional thresholds on monozygotic ( rM Z ) and dizygotic ( rDZ ) twin correlations, each coupling was assigned to the ACE E or ADE E formulations, or excluded due to violation of model assumptions or evidence of epistatic effects. Our framework extends the classical twin model by ex-plicitly incorporating test–retest reliability ( rT R ), enabling the separation of true environmental variance from measurement noise ( E). The resulting formulations provide corrected estimates of additive (A), dominant (D), shared (C), and unique environmental (E) contributions, subject to the updated constraint 

A + C + E + E = 1 or A + D + E + E = 1 

This extension is essential for improving interpretability in analyses of functional connectomes. By restricting inference to couplings that satisfy classical twin model assumptions and explicitly accounting for measurement error, the ACE E/ADE E framework enables a more accurate quantification of the relative contributions of genetic and environmental factors to brain connectivity. Moreover, the epistasis regime (rM Z > 4rDZ ) captures couplings consistent with non-additive gene–gene interactions, underscoring the complexity of genetic influences beyond additive and dominant effects. Together, this structured classi-fication provides the foundation for subsequent analyses, including the spatial mapping and hierarchical organization of heritable connectivity patterns. Figure 7 shows that the majority of functional couplings follow the ACE E model, indicating that addi-tive genetic and shared environmental effects account for a substantial portion of functional connectivity variability across both resting-state and task conditions. A smaller but consistent fraction of couplings is better explained by the ADE E model, reflecting contributions from dominant genetic interactions. The presence of epistatic and non-applicable couplings further underscores the complexity and heterogeneity –33– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

of heritability across the connectome. Importantly, the high consistency between test and retest sessions supports the robustness of these patterns, and averaging across sessions increases the fraction of couplings that satisfy model assumptions, thereby improving the reliability of downstream analyses. These results also highlight the critical importance of appropriately determining when ACE, ADE, or neither model should be applied. Systematically imposing the ACE model, without verifying the un-derlying correlation structure, can lead to biased variance decomposition. In particular, when the ACE assumptions are violated, the shared environment term (C) can become negative, and because the total variance is constrained to sum to one, this artifact artificially inflates estimates of additive genetic effects (A). Such mis-specification can lead to overestimation of heritability and misinterpretation of the rela-tive contributions of genetic and environmental factors (Chung, Huang, Carroll, Calhoun, & Goldsmith, 2024; Colclough et al., 2017). By explicitly enforcing model selection criteria based on the relationships between rM Z and rDZ , it is possible to avoid these biases and ensures that variance components are inter-preted within their appropriate regimes. The observed variation in the fraction of non-applicable couplings across resting-state and task fMRI conditions reflects contributions from both scan length and fMRI condition. Consistent with prior work demonstrating the impact of acquisition duration on the reliability of functional connectivity estimates (Abdul Wahab et al., 2022; Birn et al., 2013; Jarrahi, 2021; Ooi et al., 2025), shorter scans were associated with a substantial reduction in the proportion of analyzable couplings. However, this effect cannot be attributed solely to scan length. As shown in Figure 8, the fraction of non-applicable couplings decreased with increasing scan length but also differed systematically between resting-state and task conditions. Multiple linear regression analysis further confirmed that both scan length and condition are significant predictors of this variability. Across most tasks, the proportion of non-applicable couplings was lower than in resting state at comparable scan durations, suggesting that task engagement may enhance the stability of connectivity estimates. The motor task constituted a notable exception, exhibiting a higher fraction of non-applicable couplings than resting state at similar scan lengths, potentially reflecting its comparatively lower cognitive demands. Together, these findings indicate that acquisition duration and brain state jointly shape the reliability of inter-individual connectivity estimates. To address this limitation, we developed a minimum-error integration strategy that combines infor-mation across all fMRI conditions to maximize reliability. For each functional coupling, the estimate –34– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

corresponding to the condition with the lowest measurement error ( E) is retained, thereby accounting for scan-specific variability and enhancing the stability of variance component estimates. This approach en-ables the aggregation of data across conditions with heterogeneous reliability, yielding a more robust and interpretable representation of the underlying genetic architecture of functional connectivity. Applying a multilayer, multi-resolution community detection framework to the integrated A/C/D/E ma-trices revealed a hierarchical modular organization of genetic and environmental influences on functional connectivity. For each resolution parameter ( γ), a consensus matrix was computed and treated as a layer within a multiplex network, enabling the identification of modules that are consistent across scales. The re-sulting distance matrices and dendrograms summarize inter-regional similarity in community assignment patterns, revealing a hierarchical clustering that is subsequently projected onto the cortical surface. To-gether, these findings demonstrate that heritable and environmental effects on the functional connectome are organized into spatially distributed, component-specific, and hierarchically structured communities. Cortical projections further indicate that these modules occupy distinct yet partially overlapping brain re-gions. The observed hierarchical organization suggests that genetic and environment influences operate across multiple spatial scales, spanning both localized subnetworks and distributed large-scale systems. The present work has several limitations that warrant consideration. First, the sample is restricted to a young adult cohort; extending this framework to older populations may reveal age-related shifts in the balance between genetic and environmental influences (Briley & Tucker-Drob, 2013; Haworth et al., 2010) on functional connectivity. Second, although measurement noise was explicitly modeled using test–retest reliability, residual sources of variability—such as physiological artifacts and preprocessing-related differences—may still contribute to the estimated error term ( E). Third, the relatively modest sample size limits statistical power, particularly for detecting shared environmental and epistatic effects. Future studies with larger cohorts and longer scan durations may yield more precise variance component estimates and increase the detectable contribution of true environmental influences. At present, the Human Connectome Project (HCP) provides an openly available collection of resting-state fMRI data from monozygotic and dizygotic twins with well-characterized family structure. As larger and more demographically diverse twin datasets become available, future studies will be able to validate and extend the present findings. In addition, diffusion MRI offers a complementary avenue to character-ize heritable aspects of white-matter architecture and, when integrated with functional connectivity, may –35– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

provide a more comprehensive view of the structural substrates underlying genetic and environmental in-fluences. Incorporating detailed demographic, behavioral, and cognitive measures will further enable the investigation of associations between brain connectivity and phenotypic traits, including the assessment of shared genetic contributions. The proposed framework is also readily extensible to multimodal data integration. For example, com-bining structural and functional MRI within the same modeling framework would enable the characteriza-tion of heritability across both brain architecture and dynamics. In this context, the multilayer community detection approach could be extended to identify shared genetic patterns spanning structural and functional domains, providing a unified view of how genetic influences shape both brain organization and activity. In summary, this work introduces an extended twin modeling framework that explicitly separates mea-surement error from environmental variance, enabling more accurate and interpretable estimates of heri-tability and environment in functional brain connectivity. By integrating data across multiple fMRI condi-tions and characterizing genetic and environmental organization using multilayer community detection, we show that these influences are spatially distributed and hierarchically structured across the cortex. These findings highlight the complex genetic and environmental architecture underlying brain network organi-zation and provide a principled foundation for future studies linking specific brain connectivity patterns, cognition, and behavior to genetic and environmental factors. –36– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

REFERENCES 

Abbas, K., Liu, M., Wang, M., Duong-Tran, D., Tipnis, U., Amico, E., . . . Go˜ ni, J. (2023). Tangent functional connectomes uncover more unique phenotypic traits. iScience , 26 (9), 107048. Abdul Wahab, N. S., Yahya, N., Yusoff, A. N., Zakaria, R., Thanabalan, J., Othman, E., . . . Manan, H. A. (2022). Effects of different scan duration on brain effective connectivity among default mode network nodes. Diagnostics (Basel) , 12 (5), 1277. Achenbach, T. M., & Rescorla, L. A. (2003). Manual for the ASEBA adult forms and profiles . University of Vermont, Research Center for Children, Youth, and Families. Amico, E., Arenas, A., & Go˜ ni, J. (2019). Centralized and distributed cognitive task processing in the human connectome. 

Netw Neurosci , 3(2), 455–474. Bianciardi, M., Fukunaga, M., van Gelderen, P., Horovitz, S. G., de Zwart, J. A., Shmueli, K., & Duyn, J. H. (2009). Sources of functional magnetic resonance imaging signal fluctuations in the human brain at rest: a 7 t study. Magnetic resonance imaging , 27 (8), 1019–1029. Birn, R. M., Molloy, E. K., Patriat, R., Parker, T., Meier, T. B., Kirk, G. R., . . . Prabhakaran, V. (2013). The effect of scan length on the reliability of resting-state fMRI connectivity estimates. Neuroimage , 83 , 550–558. Blokland, G. A. M., McMahon, K. L., Hoffman, J., Zhu, G., Meredith, M., Martin, N. G., . . . Wright, M. J. (2008). Quantifying the heritability of task-related brain activation and performance during the N-back working memory task: A twin fMRI study. Biol Psychol , 79 (1), 70–79. Blokland, G. A. M., Mosing, M. A., Verweij, K. J. H., & Medland, S. E. (2013). Twin studies and behavior genetics. In The oxford handbook of quantitative methods in psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 190–218). Oxford University Press. Boomsma, D., Busjahn, A., & Peltonen, L. (2002). Classical twin studies and beyond. Nature reviews genetics , 3(11), 872–882. Briley, D. A., & Tucker-Drob, E. M. (2013). Explaining the increasing heritability of cognitive ability across development: a meta-analysis of longitudinal twin and adoption studies. Psychol Sci , 24 (9), 1704–1713. 

–37– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Carvalho, V., Liu, M., Harezlak, J., G´ omez, A. M. E., & Go˜ ni, J. (2025). Functional connectome fingerprinting through tucker tensor decomposition. Appl Sci , 15 (9), 4762. Chang, C., Leopold, D. A., Sch¨ olvinck, M. L., Mandelkow, H., Picchioni, D., Liu, X., . . . Duyn, J. H. (2016). Tracking brain arousal fluctuations with fmri. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 113 (16), 4518–4523. Chen, G., Moraczewski, D., & Taylor, P. A. (2025). Improving accuracy and precision of heritability estimation in twin studies through hierarchical modeling: reassessing the measurement error assumption. Front Genet , 16 .Chung, M. K., Huang, S.-G., Carroll, I. C., Calhoun, V. D., & Goldsmith, H. H. (2024). Topological state-space estimation of functional human brain networks. PLoS Comput Biol , 20 (5), e1012141. Colclough, G. L., Smith, S. M., Nichols, T. E., Winkler, A. M., Sotiropoulos, S. N., Glasser, M. F., . . . Woolrich, M. W. (2017). The heritability of multi-modal connectivity in human brain activity. eLife , 6, e20178. Cole, M. W., Bassett, D. S., Power, J. D., Braver, T. S., & Petersen, S. E. (2014). Intrinsic and task-evoked network architectures of the human brain. Neuron , 83 (1), 238–251. Craig, J. M., Calais-Ferreira, L., Umstad, M. P., & Buchwald, D. (2020). The value of twins for health and medical research: a third of a century of progress. Twin Research and Human Genetics , 23 (1), 8–15. De Domenico, M., Granell, C., Porter, M. A., & Arenas, A. (2016). The physics of spreading processes in multilayer networks. Nat Phys , 12 (10), 901–906. Dominguez, O. M., Feczko, E., Grayson, D. S., Walum, H., Nigg, J. T., & Fair, D. A. (2018). Heritability of the human connectome: A connectotyping study. Netw Neurosci , 2(2), 175–199. Finn, E. S., Shen, X., Scheinost, D., Rosenberg, M. D., Huang, J., Chun, M. M., . . . Constable, R. T. (2015). Functional connectome fingerprinting: identifying individuals using patterns of brain connectivity. Nat Neurosci , 18 (11), 1664–1671. Ge, T., Holmes, A. J., Buckner, R. L., Smoller, J. W., & Sabuncu, M. R. (2017). Heritability analysis with repeat mea-surements and its application to resting-state functional connectivity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,

114 (21), 5521–5526. Gershon, R. C., Wagster, M. V., Hendrie, H. C., Fox, N. A., Cook, K. F., & Nowinski, C. J. (2013). NIH toolbox for assessment of neurological and behavioral function. Neurology , 80 (11 Suppl 3), S2–S6. 

–38– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Glahn, D. C., Winkler, A. M., Kochunov, P., Almasy, L., Duggirala, R., Carless, M. A., . . . Blangero, J. (2010). Genetic control over the resting brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA , 107 (3), 1223–1228. Glasser, M. F., Sotiropoulos, S. N., Wilson, J. A., Coalson, T. S., Fischl, B., Andersson, J. L., . . . Jenkinson, M. (2013). The minimal preprocessing pipelines for the human connectome project. Neuroimage , 80 , 105–124. Greve, D. N., Brown, G. G., Mueller, B. A., Glover, G., Liu, T. T., et al. (2013). A survey of the sources of noise in fmri. 

Psychometrika , 78 (3), 396–416. Gu, Y., Han, F., & Liu, X. (2019). Arousal contributions to resting-state fmri connectivity and dynamics. Frontiers in Neuroscience , 13 , 1190. Guerrero, D., Dzemidzic, M., Moghaddam, M., Liu, M., Avena-Koenigsberger, A., Harezlak, J., . . . Go˜ ni, J. (2025). Resting state functional connectivity patterns associate with alcohol use disorder characteristics: Insights from the triple network model. Neuroimage Clin , 45 , 103715. Hagenbeek, F. A., Hirzinger, J. S., Breunig, S., Bruins, S., Kuznetsov, D. V., Schut, K., . . . Boomsma, D. I. (2023). Maxi-mizing the value of twin studies in health and behaviour. Nature Human Behaviour , 7(6), 849–860. Haworth, C. M. A., Wright, M. J., Luciano, M., Martin, N. G., de Geus, E. J. C., van Beijsterveldt, C. E. M., . . . Plomin, R. (2010). The heritability of general cognitive ability increases linearly from childhood to young adulthood. Mol Psychiatry ,

15 (11), 1112–1120. Horien, C., Shen, X., Scheinost, D., & Constable, R. T. (2019). The individual functional connectome is unique and stable over months to years. Neuroimage , 189 , 676–687. Hubert, L., & Arabie, P. (1985). Comparing partitions. J Classif , 2(1), 193–218. Hulshoff Pol, H. E., Brans, R. G. H., van Haren, N. E. M., Schnack, H. G., Langen, M., Baare, W. F. C., . . . Kahn, R. S. (2004). Gray and white matter volume abnormalities in monozygotic and same-gender dizygotic twins discordant for schizophrenia. Biol Psychiatry , 55 (2), 126–130. Jansen, A. G., Mous, S. E., White, T., Posthuma, D., & Polderman, T. J. C. (2015). What twin studies tell us about the heritability of brain development, morphology, and function: a review. Neuropsychol Rev , 25 (1), 27–46. 

–39– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Jarrahi, B. (2021). A preliminary assessment of the impact of scan length on ICA dimensionality and network features. In 

IEEE EMBS international conference on biomedical and health informatics (BHI) (pp. 1–5). IEEE. Kivel¨ a, M., Arenas, A., Barthelemy, M., Gleeson, J. P., Moreno, Y., & Porter, M. A. (2014). Multilayer networks. J Complex Netw , 2(3), 203–271. Lancichinetti, A., & Fortunato, S. (2012). Consensus clustering in complex networks. Sci Rep , 2, 336. Laumann, T. O., Snyder, A. Z., Mitra, A., Gordon, E. M., Gratton, C., Adeyemo, B., . . . others (2017). On the stability of bold fmri correlations. Cerebral cortex , 27 (10), 4719–4732. Liu, T. T. (2016). Noise contributions to the fmri signal: An overview. NeuroImage , 143 , 141–151. McIntosh, A. R., & Lobaugh, N. J. (2004). Partial least squares analysis of neuroimaging data: applications and advances. 

Neuroimage , 23 (Suppl 1), S250–S263. Mocini, E., Cammarota, C., Frigerio, F., Muzzioli, L., Piciocchi, C., Lacalaprice, D., . . . Pinto, A. (2023). Digital anthropom-etry: A systematic review on precision, reliability and accuracy of most popular existing technologies. Nutrients , 15 (2), 302. Mucha, P. J., Richardson, T., Macon, K., Porter, M. A., & Onnela, J.-P. (2010). Community structure in time-dependent, multiscale, and multiplex networks. Science , 328 (5980), 876–878. Murphy, K., Birn, R. M., & Bandettini, P. A. (2013). Resting-state fmri confounds and cleanup. Neuroimage , 80 , 349–359. Neale, M. C., & Cardon, L. R. (1992). Methodology for genetic studies of twins and families. Nutrients .Newman, M. E. J. (2006). Modularity and community structure in networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA , 103 (23), 8577–8582. Newman, M. E. J., & Girvan, M. (2004). Finding and evaluating community structure in networks. Phys Rev E , 69 (2), 026113. Ooi, L. Q. R., Orban, C., Zhang, S., Nichols, T. E., Tan, T. W. K., Kong, R., . . . others (2025). Longer scans boost prediction and cut costs in brain-wide association studies. Nature , 644 , 731–740. Polderman, T. J., Benyamin, B., De Leeuw, C. A., Sullivan, P. F., Van Bochoven, A., Visscher, P. M., & Posthuma, D. (2015). Meta-analysis of the heritability of human traits based on fifty years of twin studies. Nature genetics , 47 (7), 702–709. 

–40– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Pourmotabbed, H., Clarke, D. F., Chang, C., & Ferrarini, A. B. (2024). Genetic fingerprinting with heritable phenotypes of the resting-state brain network topology. Commun Biol , 7, 1221. Power, J. D., Mitra, A., Laumann, T. O., Snyder, A. Z., Schlaggar, B. L., & Petersen, S. E. (2014). Methods to detect, characterize, and remove motion artifact in resting state fMRI. Neuroimage , 84 , 320–341. Schaefer, A., Kong, R., Gordon, E. M., Laumann, T. O., Zuo, X.-N., Holmes, A. J., . . . Yeo, B. T. T. (2018). Local-global parcellation of the human cerebral cortex from intrinsic functional connectivity MRI. Cereb Cortex , 28 (9), 3095–3114. Shen, X., Finn, E. S., Scheinost, D., Rosenberg, M. D., Chun, M. M., Papademetris, X., & Constable, R. T. (2017). Using connectome-based predictive modeling to predict individual behavior from brain connectivity. Nat Protoc , 12 (3), 506– 518. Smith, S. M., Beckmann, C. F., Andersson, J., et al. (2013). Resting-state fMRI in the human connectome project. Neuroim-age , 80 , 144–168. Smith, S. M., Miller, K. L., Salimi-Khorshidi, G., Webster, M., Beckmann, C. F., Nichols, T. E., . . . Woolrich, M. W. (2011). Network modelling methods for fmri. Neuroimage , 54 (2), 875–891. Tassi, E., Maggioni, E., Mauri, M., Fagnani, C., Agarwal, N., Bellina, A. M., . . . Brambilla, P. (2023). Environmental effects on brain functional networks in a juvenile twin population. Sci Rep , 13 , 3921. Teeuw, J., Brouwer, R. M., Koenis, M. M. G., Swagerman, S. C., Boomsma, D. I., & Hulshoff Pol, H. E. (2019). Genetic influences on the development of cerebral cortical thickness during childhood and adolescence in a dutch longitudinal twin sample: The BrainScale study. Cereb Cortex , 29 (3), 978–993. Ulijaszek, S. J., & Kerr, D. A. (1999). Anthropometric measurement error and the assessment of nutritional status. British Journal of Nutrition , 82 (3), 165–177. van Dongen, J., Slagboom, E. P., Draisma, H. H. M., Martin, N. G., & Boomsma, D. I. (2012). The continuing value of twin studies in the omics era. Nat Rev Genet , 13 (9), 640–653. Van Essen, D. C., Smith, S. M., Barch, D. M., Behrens, T. E. J., Yacoub, E., & Ugurbil, K. (2013). The WU-Minn human connectome project: An overview. Neuroimage , 80 , 62–79. 

–41– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Wang, C., Ong, J. L., Patanaik, A., Zhou, J., & Chee, M. W. (2016). Spontaneous eyelid closures link vigilance fluctuation with fmri dynamic connectivity states. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 113 (34), 9653–9658. Weintraub, S., Dikmen, S. S., Heaton, R. K., Tulsky, D. S., Zelazo, P. D., Bauer, P. J., . . . Gershon, R. C. (2013). Cognition assessment using the NIH toolbox. Neurology , 80 (11 Suppl 3), S54–S64. Wu, X., Zhang, Y., Xue, M., Li, J., Li, X., Cui, Z., . . . Yang, G. (2024). Heritability of functional gradients in the human subcortico-cortical connectivity. Commun Biol , 7, 854. Yao, X., Brown, B. K., Yang, H., & Biswal, B. (2023). Structural and functional network analysis of twins using fMRI data. 

Cereb Cortex , 33 (22), 11060–11069. Yeo, B. T. T., Krienen, F. M., Sepulcre, J., Sabuncu, M. R., Lashkari, D., Hollinshead, M., . . . Buckner, R. L. (2011). The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. J Neurophysiol , 106 (3), 1125– 1165. Zuo, X.-N., & Xing, X.-X. (2014). Test-retest reliabilities of resting-state fmri measurements in human brain functional connectomics: a systems neuroscience perspective. Neuroscience & biobehavioral reviews , 45 , 100–118. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This work was supported by NIH CTSI CTR EPAR2169, NIH R21 AA029614, NIH R01 AA029607, Indiana Alcohol Research Center P60AA07611, NINDS R01NS126449 and NINDS R01NS112303 

5 SUPPORTING INFORMATION 

–42– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Figure S1: Convergence of correlation estimates across repeated random samplings for test–retest, monozygotic (MZ), and dizygotic (DZ) twin pairs. Each panel shows the divergence of sampled correla-tion coefficients from the mean correlation as the number of samples increases. The black line represents the mean ( μ) across all iterations, while colored lines indicate ±0.5σ (blue), ±σ (magenta), and ±2σ (red) bounds. As the number of samplings increases, the variability of the estimates diminishes and the curves converge toward stable mean correlations, demonstrating reliability of the sampling-based correlation es-timation procedure. –43– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Figure S2: Number of detected communities for each component (A, C, D, E, and E) across the resolution parameter ( γ). For the measurement error ( E) matrix, the number of communities stabilizes at γ = 1 .69 

(vertical dashed line), which we use as the maximum γ value when building the multilayer network. The minimum γ value in the range is chosen as the point where all components first show at least two communities. –44– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Figure S3: Multilayer community detection for the additive genetics (A), common environment (C), dominant genetics (D), unique environment (E), and measurement error ( γ) multiplex networks (left). For each component, brain region community (rows) are shown across the entire γ range, illustrating how modular structure evolves with increasing resolution (columns). The panels on the right display the associated distance matrices, reordered according to hierarchical clustering, which identify sets of regions that exhibit similar modular trajectories across the γ range, revealing the hierarchical organization underlying each component. –45– / Title: The Genetic and Environmental Architecture of the Human Functional Connectome 

Figure S4: Distribution of demographic, cognitive, and behavioral traits across the full sample. His-tograms illustrate the distribution of each trait, including height, weight, BMI, cognitive performance (episodic memory, executive function—cognitive flexibility and inhibition, fluid intelligence, language reading/decoding, and processing speed), and behavioral measures (ASR internalizing and externalizing raw scores). –46–