Title: 2604.22000v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.22000v1

Published Time: Mon, 27 Apr 2026 00:03:26 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
L-System Genetic Encoding for Scalable Neural Network Evolution: A Comparison 

# with Direct Matrix Encoding 

Alexander Stuy 

M.S. Computer Science 1994, Florida State University 

astuy@bio.fsu.edu 

Nodin Weddington 

B.S. Physics 2002, Florida State University 

nweddington@fsu.edu 

# Abstract 

An artificial world of barriers and plains scattered with food is used to test the feasibility of using genetic 

algorithms to optimize hebbian neural networks to perform on problems without apriori knowledge of the 

problem domain. A formal L -System based g enetic alphabet for neural networks, titled Lsys, and a neural 

network genetic modeling tool titled Wp1hgn are introduced. Lsys and Matrix neural network topology genetic 

encoding methods are compared across 24 experimental runs. Lsys encoding achieved a m ean maximum food 

count of 3802 ± 197 at generation 1000 across 8 runs with varied parameters, compared to 1388 ± 610 for 

Matrix encoding , a 2.74x performance advantage with an 8.5 -fold improvement in consistency as measured by 

coefficient of variation (5.2% vs 44.0%). All 8 Lsys populations successfully learned to navigate the 

environment, while 4 of 8 Matrix populations failed to achieve co mpetitive performance at any point during 

1000 generations. When transferred to a novel maze environment, Lsys populat ions demonstrated immediate 

robust generalization, achieving a mean maximum food count of 2455 ± 176 compared to 422 ± 212 for Matrix 

populations , a 5.82x advantage that exceeded the training world performance gap. A MatrixLSG control 

condition, in which initial populations were generated using Lsys genotypes and then evolved using Matrix 

operators, demonstrated that the performance advantage of Lsy s encoding derives primarily from the genetic 

algorithm operating on the compressed symbolic Lsys alphabet thr oughout evolution rather than from initial 

population structure. Lsys encoding is shown to provide faster convergence, higher peak performance, 

dramatically greater reliability, and superior generalization to novel environments compared to Matrix encoding 

across all experimental conditions tested. 

# 1 Introduction 

Artificial neural networks and genetic algorithms are both inspired by the success of their biological 

counterparts. Speed increases in computers in recent years have allowed scientists to combine the software 

models of these processes. Genetic algorithm s have proved capable of optimizing large complex structures, and 

a artificial neural network is just such a structure. Neural network optimization methods manipulate the 

number of neurons and the connections between them (network topology) in order to g enerate a network that 

learns better than one that is unoptimized. By encoding the network topology into a genotype, genetic 

algorithms can be used to perform the optimization. 

Neural networks can be genetically optimized to perform on traditional neural network problems such as 

pattern recognition and input/output pattern learning. Even more interesting however is that networks can be 

evolved to solve non -continuous functions w ithout any apriori knowledge of the function. In their 1988 paper 

Stefano Nolfi and Domenico Parisi describe genetically optimized back -propagation neural networks which 

demonstrate an ability to learn to collect food in an artificial environment [12]. A normal back propagation 

network is combined with a genetic neural network which supplies the teaching input to the back propagation 

network. Biological neurons have been shown to employ a form of learning known as hebbian learning [7]. 

Artificial hebbi an networks can be used for feature identifying, data clustering and object recognition [6]. 

## Overview of Experiment 

The first purpose of the experiment that is the basis of this paper is an attempt to optimize a hebbian neural 

network for existence in an artificial environmen t. Possible applications of the technique include robot control 

and system control, however more traditional neural network problems could also be programmed. 2

Performance of the artificial hebbian networks will be observed by introducing each network into an artificial 

environment that the network must navigate while searching for food. Network performance is measured as the 

amount of food found by the network. If the genetic algorithm is successful in optimizing the hebbian neural 

networks the average performance of the networks will increase through successive generations. 

Further the experiment will measure the performance of two different methods for encoding the network 

topologies. By keeping all factors constant except for the encoding method the experiment will determine 

whether the encoding method used to encode the neural network topology affects the performance of the gene tic 

algorithm, and if so, which type of encoding methods offer the best performance. Encoding method one ,

hereafter referred to as Matrix encoding, is standard matrix encoding of a neural network , connectivity and 

weight vectors . Encoding method two , hereafter referred to as Lsys encoding, is based on L-Systems, which 

have been shown to generate patterns resembling patterns produced by growth in biological organisms [10] and 

is used to model the growth of biological neuron structures [1 7]. 

# 2 Background 

## 2.1 Neural Networks 

Artificial neural networks were inspired by the computing ability of biological neural networks. The human 

brain performs feats, such as seemingly parallel classification of multiple objects, in a fraction of the time that 

the worlds fastest computer coul d accomplish the same task. The feat is remarkable as the speed at which 

biological neurons operate is seven orders of magnitude slower than computer semiconductor gates [4]. The 

brain can perform such feats because it operates 10 11 neurons in parallel. Without employing multiple 

processors, computer simulations of neural networks must operate the neurons serially, although simulations 

can simulate parallel update. In the last several years neural networks have been built on chips, with the ability 

for true parallel update. However the brain is more than just a large collection of homogenous neurons. The 

brain contains at least 14 distinct types of neurons [4]. The variety of these neurons and the connectivity 

between them is crucial to the brain's am azing performance . Many millions of years of evolution have gone 

into creating this structure. 

2.1.1 Biological Neural Networks 

A biological neural network (BNN) is composed of specialized cells called neurons . The main components of 

biological neurons are a cell body , nucleus , axons and dendrites (Figure 1). The dendrites receive signals from 

the nervous system or from the axons of other neurons. Depending on the input from it's dendrites the neuron 

generates an impulse known as an action potential [4]. This impulse propagates as a wave down the a xon, 

providing a signal to the dendrites of other neurons connected to the axon's branches. Learning in the brain can 

occur by strengthening or weakening the connections between axons and dendrites. In 1949 Donald Hebb 

postulated a learning rule, dubbed hebbian learning , as a model of learning for biological neurons [7]. The 

hebbian model strengthens the weight on a connection whenever the neurons on both sides of the connection 

fire together. 3

Figure 1: Biological Neuron. 

2.1.2 Artificial Neural Networks 

Like a BNN an artificial neural network (ANN) consists of one or more interconnected neurons. The neurons i n

an ANN can be described mathematically : 

E : input vector to neuron. 

w : weight vector for scaling input vector to neuron. 

f : firing function, functions used include threshold, linear and sigmoidal functions. 

V : output of neuron. 

An artificial neuron with i inputs (dendrites) is fired with the formula : 

V = f( k=1..i (Ek * w k)) 

One of the first models of an artificial neuron was the McCulloch/Pitts neuron. In the McCulloch/Pitts model 

the firing function f is a threshold binary function. Each neuron outputs a one if V is above a certain threshold, 

else the output is zero [6]. Although this seems simple, McCulloch and Pitts proved that a synchronous 

assembly of these neurons with the proper weight vector w can realize any computable function. 

In order for ANN's to learn the values on the weight vector w are adjusted. The value of the adjustment for 

each w i is termed wi. ANN's can be put into two categories. Those that use supervised learning to obtain 

w and those that use unsupervised learning to obtain w. With supervised learning the network is supplied a set 

of training inputs, along with the correct output for each input. The network uses the input output pairs to adjust 

w to minimize network error on the training set. This performance carries over to inputs not in the training set 

by virtue of a neural network's ability to generalize. Unsupervised learning ANN's are only supplied with input 

patterns. The network clusters or classifies the input data into categories. Therefor there must be meaning ful 

redundancies in the input data. Unsupervised networks can perform functions such as clustering of data, 

encoding and feature mapping, with the architecture of the network regulating the function the network 

performs [6]. 

One of the most widely used neural networks is the backpropogation network. The output of neurons in a 

backpropogation network is analog rather than digital, and the firing function f is typically a sigmoidal function. 

The name backpropogation describes the process of propagating the error between expected and actual output 

backward through the net in order to obtain w for each neuron. 

Figure 2 : artificial neuron, V = f( k=1..i (Ek * w k)). 

Hebbian Neural Networks 

In 1949 Donald Hebb postulated a learning rule, dubbed hebbian learning , as a model of learning for biological 

neurons [7]. The hebbian model strengthens the weight on a connection whenever the neurons on both sides of 

the connection fire together. Using the notation introduced at the beginning of 2.2.1 the model can be expressed 

as : 

wi = nVEi

Hebbian neural networks fall into the unsupervised learning category. The information required to update w

is the input to the neuron and the output of the neuron. After sufficient update of the connection weights the 

output V of each neuron becomes a scalar measure of familiarity of the input E. Output V is directly related to 

the probability of receiving input E. Hebbian networks have been applied as feature detectors, being given data 

much as would be received from a retina [6]. Layered hebbian networks have been proposed as a model of self -

organization in the visual cortex. Variations of the original hebbian update rule include Oja's rule : 4

wi = nV( Ei - Vw i), 

Oja's rule avoids unlimited growth in the weights on connections which occurs under Hebb's original rule[6]. 

## 2.2 Genetic Algorithms 

Genetic algorithms (GAs) are computer optimization methods inspired by molecular genetics and Darwin's 

theory of natural selection. All GAs, both biological and artificial, are search algorithms. In nature natural 

selection favors organisms with the grea test propogative ability. An organisms propogative ability is a function 

of the organism's genotype (DNA) and the organism's environment. Biological genetic algorithms search the 

domain space of possible DNA sequences for ever more fit sequences, in rela tion to the environment in which 

the DNA finds itself expressed. Ability to propagate in an environment can be equated to a fitness function for 

the organisms which inhabit the environment. 

GAs operate on genotypes, which are composed of a set of symbols. Most life on earth uses the bases 

guanine, cytosine, adenine and thymine, a four symbol alphabet commonly abbreviated to G, C, A and T. 

Artificial GAs commonly use binary encoding methods, although larger alphabets have been used. 

A simple artificial GA is composed of the operators : selection, crossover, and mutation. 

selection 

The initial generation of genotypes is generated randomly. After the initial generation is generated the selection 

operator chooses from the current population the genotypes that will reproduce to form each succeeding 

generation. A fitness function is us ed to measure the fitness of each genotype. The parameters to the function 

are decoded from the genotype. The function used is based on the problem that one is attempting to solve with 

the genetic algorithm. Many different procedures can be used to perf orm selection, all involve choosing, either 

stochastically or deterministically, the fittest genotypes from the population. A commonly used selection 

procedure is roulette wheel selection. After the fitness of all genotypes has been determined a roulette wheel is 

generated with each genotype receiving a slot sized in proportion to the genotype's fitness in relation to the 

average fitness of the entire population. Selection into the reproduction genepool is then determined by simple 

spins of the roulette wheel. 

crossover 

The crossover operator combines two genotypes chosen for reproduction by splitting each genotype into two or 

more pieces and combining pieces from both genotypes into a new genotype. Typically not all genotypes 

selected for reproduction are subject to cro ssover. A parameter termed the probability of crossover is used to 

stochastically determine which genotypes are candidates. 

mutation 

Following selection and crossover genotypes are typically subjected to a mutation operator. The mutation 

operator scans each gene in the genotype and with a probability termed the probability of mutation, flips the 

gene to another symbol in the genetic al phabet. Mutation helps to maintain population diversity 

Pseudo code for a simple GA 

Generate the first generation of genotypes randomly 

Loop 

Measure fitness of each genotype. 

Select genotypes for reproduction based on fitness. 

Construct next generation of genotypes from selected genotypes using the crossover and mutation 

operators. 

Until stop -condition 

The process loops until a genotype performs to an acceptable level of fitness, or until the increase of fitness in 

successive generations grinds to a halt. The second condition can occur due to a number of causes. The two 

most common are premature conver gence and mutation stall. 

premature convergence 

After the initial random generation of the population in a GA it is expected that most genotypes will prove to 

have a very poor fitness, as they are a random attempt at a solution. However often a few of genotypes will 

have fitness far above the rest of t he population, and although the fitness these genotypes is not the global 5

maximum achievable they will nevertheless dominate the population due to their relative fitness. The GA then 

becomes trapped at or near this fitness level due to a loss of all other genes from the population (premature 

convergence). 

mutation stall 

The mutation operator scans each gene in a genotype and with a preset probability flips the gene to another 

character in the genetic alphabet. While mutation increases genetic diversity in the population mutation also 

carries the risk of mutating a benefi cial gene, resulting in a decrease in fitness. If the mutation rate is set too 

high the destructive affect can cause the GA's performance to level off after a sufficient level of complexity has 

arisen in the genotypes (mutation stall). 

2.2.1 Schema 

A schema is a method for denotating a subset of strings (genotypes) with similarities at indicated positions 

(genes) [8]. Schemas are constructed from the genetic alphabet plus an additional don't care character, usually 

the '*'. In a GA using a binary alphabet the extended alphabet used for creating schemata would be {0, 1, *}. 

In a binary GA with strings (genotypes) of length 5 the schema *111* would denote all strings with a 1 in the 

middle three p ositions, {01110, 01111, 11110, 11111}. 

The fitness of a schema is the average fitness of all the genotypes in the population that contain the schema. 

Holland showed that the proportion of a particular schema in a population grows at a rate proportional to the 

ratio of the fitness of the schema to the average fitness of the entire population. This proportional growth 

happens in parallel for all schemata present in a population [8]. 

2.2.2 Alphabets 

In order to use genetic algorithms to solve a given problem a method for encoding the parameters of the 

problem (fitness function) into a genotype must be chosen. The smaller the cardinality of the genetic alphabet 

chosen the more schemata the resulting p opulation will contain, although schemata which cross over parameter 

encodings are of questionable use. The principle of minimal alphabets states : The user should select the 

smallest alphabet that permits a natural expression of the problem [8]. Paramet ers are often coded into a 

binary representation and the resulting binary strings are combined to form a genotype. However non binary 

encoding have been successfully employed in genetic algorithms, including genetic algorithms used to optimize 

neural netw orks [5]. 

Genetic algorithms have been applied to a wide variety of problems such as pattern recognition, classifier 

systems and structural optimization. A.K. Dewdey used genetic algorithms to evolve finite automata, dubbed 

flibs, which predict binary number sequen ces [2]. Classifier systems also respond well to genetic manipulation. 

Evolved classifiers systems have been able to perform object recognition in noisy environments [13]. 

Simulated robots which use genetically selected classifiers to produce output h ave been evolved to chase a 

simulated light source.[3] 

2.3 L-System s

Lindenmayer systems or L-System s were introduced by biologist Aristid Lindenmayer in 1968 as a method for 

describing the morphology of growth in biological systems, particularly plants. L-System s are a type of context 

free grammar studied in formal language theory. L-System s have been widely used to model plant growth and 

to generate computer graphics. One of the first attempts of modeling biological systems with L-System s was 

performed by D. Fritjers and A. Lindenmayer, who modeled the growth and flower ing of the plant Aster novae -

angliae with a L-System [1 5]. L-System s can also be used to encode neural network topologies, generating 

connectivity patterns in the networks similar to connectivity patterns seen in regions of the brain [10]. 

L-System s consist of a finite alphabet of symbols and a set of rules or productions , each of which maps one 

symbol or string of symbols from the alphabet to another symbol or string of symbols. The alphabet usually 

consists of upper and lower case letters, though other alphabets can be used. The set of characters {S, A, B, C, 

D, a, b, c, d, e, f} is a valid L-System alphabet. A valid production using the above defined alphabet is : S ->

BCdA. All L-System s must have a start symbol or an identity produ ction. S is commonly used to denote the 6

start symbol and is used only on the left side of the identity production. Symbols that are never found on the 

left hand side of a production are termed terminals, as they represent an end to the production process. Non 

terminals appear on the left hand side of at least one production. Any string of symbols produced by the 

execution of the productions of a L-System is termed a word of the L-System . The set of all possible words 

produced by an L-System is termed the language of the L-System .

Figure 3 shows an example L-System as well as a graph representation of the L-System . This particular L-

System models the growth of multi -cellular filament found in the blue -green bacteria Anabaena catenula [14]. 

The symbols a and b correspond to individual cells, describing the cells propensity to divide, while the 

subscripts l and r specify the position of the newborn cell after division. 

S : a r

P1 : a r -> a lbr

P2 : a l --> b lar

P3 : b r -> a r

P4 : b l -> a l

Sequence of words generated : 

ar

albr

blarar

alalbralbr

blarblararblarar

.... 

Figure 3: Simulated growth of filament from bluegreen algae Anabaena catenula 

L-Systems can also used to describe biological neural structures. Ascoli and Krichmar introduced L -Neuron, a 

software tool that uses L -System based recursive rules to generate anatomically accurate models of dendritic 

morphology [16]. L -Neuron demonstrates that the branching stru cture of biological neurons , including Purkinje 

cells, pyramidal cells, and motoneurons , can be described parsimoniously using L -System productions, 

achieving significant data compression while preserving the essential structural properties of each 

morphol ogical class. The authors note that thousands of neurons from a single morphological class, requiring 

megabytes of storage in explicit Cartesian format, can be described completely with a small set of L -System 

parameters , a compression principle directly analogous to the O(log 2n) scaling property of the Lsys encoding 

method introduced in this paper. The convergence of two independent lines of research , L-System based 

genetic encoding of network topology and L -System based description of dendritic morpholog y, suggests that 7

the hierarchical recursive structure of L -Systems captures something fundamental about how biological neural 

connectivity is organized. This biological plausibility may help explain why Lsys encoded networks exhibit 

more organic emergent behaviors than mat rix encoded networks, including the development of temporally 

extended responses and adaptive navigation strategies that parallel behaviors observed in biological organisms. 

## 2.4 Genetic Algorithms and Neural Networks 

The result of combining genetic algorithms with neural networks is termed a genetic neural network. Genetic 

neural networks consist of four components: genes that specify the network topology, a procedure for 

constructing the network from the genotype, a fitness function to measure the performance of the network, and 

genetic operators for creating the new generation of genotypes from the old generation [11]. Genetic algorithms 

can be used to optimize the number of neurons, the topology of the network, and /or to set the weights on some 

subset of the networks connections. 

Genetic neural networks can learn on two levels. On the individual level each network learns by the weight 

update rule used (neural network learning). On a population level the networks learn by modifying their 

topologies over time to decrease the average error in network output of the population. These two processes are 

known as phenotype and genotype learning, respectively. Genotype learning has been demonstrated to progress 

at a faster rate when the phenotypes have an ability to learn [9]. This should not be confused with lamarkian 

evolutionary theory. Only the genotypes are used in the genetic algorithm, what a phenotype learns is not 

passed on. 

In order to use genetic algorithms with neural networks some method of encoding the network topology into a 

form usable as a genotype must be chosen. Neural networks are often denoted as a binary matrix with size of 

the number of neurons in the network. A zero in the matrix denotes the lack of a connection between the 

corresponding neurons, a one denotes a connection. By adding a real component to the matrix the weight 

information of each connection can also be stored. 

Genetic algorithms have demonstrated success both when used to entirely determine network architecture, 

including weights [5], as well as when combined with learning rules[9]. 

2.4.1 Efficiency of coding methods 

Encoding the neural network topology as a matrix for genetic algorithms remains the standard approach in 

neuroevolution, with recent work continuing to apply matrix -based crossover operators to fully connected layer 

weight matrices [1 6]. However some e xperiments have shown that direct encoding methods may not scale up 

well compared to more symbolic represenations . The size of the matrix based genotypes generally scales very 

poorly and the number of generations required to achieve maximum performance inc reases exponentially as the 

number of neurons encoded by the genotype increases [10]. Graph L-System s, which generate graphs by rules 

rather than explicit encodings have been shown to have superior scaling ability, as well as providing a speed up 

in convergence of the genetic algorithm [10]. 

The efficiency of an encoding method is often measured in O (Big O) notation. With linear encoding methods 

such as integer pairs, the genotypes grow at O(m), m = number of connections. Encoding methods based on 

connectivity matrixes are O(n 2), n = number of neurons, since the number of cells in the matrix is n 2. L-

System based encoding methods can achieve growth rates in genotypes lower than O(n). The following is a

proof that L-System encoding methods can achieve genotype growth as low as O(log 2n). The proof uses a 

simplified version of the Lsys encoding method. 

# Proof of O(log 2n) growth of L-System genotypes for neural networks 

For a given L-System , l, three terms related to L-System s are introduced : 

S( l) : the number of symbols in the rules of the L-System .

T( l) : the number of symbols, (terminals), in the expansion of the 

L-System productions. 

N( l) : the maximum number of neurons in the neural network that 

can be encoded by the L-System .8

At this point it should be noted that the standard encoding for a neural network of x neurons uses x 2 symbols, (a 

standard connectivity matrix of ones and zeros). Thus a L-System that expands to T terminal symbols, where 

the terminal symbols are 0 and 1, encodes a network with sqrt(T) neurons, meaning that N( l) = sqrt(T( l)). 

To prove that L-System encoding methods for neural networks can be O(log 2N( l)) a series of L-System s, 

labeled LS[i], i = 1.. ∞, will be introduced such that : 

a. S(LS[i + 1]) = S(LS[i]) + C, for some constant C. 

b. T(LS[i + 1]) = 4T(LS[i]). 

Proof 

If 

S(LS[i + 1]) = S(LS[i]) + C 

T(LS[i + 1]) = 4T(LS[i]) 

N(LS[i]) = sqrt(T(LS[i])) 

then 

N(LS[i+1]) = sqrt(T(LS[i + 1])) 

= sqrt(4T(LS[i])) 

= 2N(LS[i]) 

S(LS[i]) = S(LS[0]) + i*C 

N(LS[i]) = 2 iN(LS[0]) 

Therefor given an L-System , l, which meets conditions a and b above, growth of S( l) in relation to N( l) is 

O(Log 2N( l)). 

The L-System 

In addition to the notation already presented, notation for the L-System in the proof will use the following terms 

:

t : terminal symbol variable, with possible values of one or zero. 

Li : nonterminal symbol of level i, if Li has a subscript it refers to a specific L-System symbol of level i, 

else it is a symbol variable with possible values being the symbols occuring on the left side of the productions in 

level i. 

The L-System s LS[i] are defined as follows : 

Each L-System LS[i] has i levels. A level consists of a set of Symbols and productions. The productions in 

each level map the symbols of that level to a set of four symbols in the next level, the last level maps it's 

symbols to the terminal symbols (0, 1). 

LS[1] : L1 1 -> t t t t 

LS[2] : L1 1 -> L2 L2 L2 L2 

L2 1 -> t t t t, L2 2 -> t t t t, L2 3 -> t t t t, L2 4 -> t t t t 

LS[3] : L1 1 -> L2 L2 L2 L2 

L2 1 -> L3 L3 L3 L3, L2 2 -> L3 L3 L3 L3, 

L2 3 -> L3 L3 L3 L3, L2 4 -> L3 L3 L3 L3 

L3 1 -> t t t t, L3 2 -> t t t t, L3 3 -> t t t t, L3 4 -> t t t t 

.

.

LS[i] : L1 1 -> L2 L2 L2 L2 

L2 1 -> L3 L3 L3 L3, L2 2 -> L3 L3 L3 L3, 

L2 3 -> L3 L3 L3 L3, L2 4 -> L3 L3 L3 L3 

.

.

Li 1 -> t t t t, Li 2 -> t t t t, Li 3 -> t t t t, Li 4 -> t t t t 

Statistics for these L-System s. 

LS[1] : S(LS[1]) = 5. 9

T(LS[1]) = 4. 

N(LS[1]) = 2. 

LS[2 ] : S(LS[2]) = 5 + 20. 

T(LS[2]) = 16. 

N(LS[2]) = 4. 

LS[3] : S(LS[3]) = 5 + 20 + 20. 

T(LS[3]) = 64. 

N(LS[3]) = 8. 

LS[4] : S(LS[4]) = 5 + 20 + 20 + 20. 

T(LS[4]) = 256. 

N(LS[4]) = 16. 

The value of S(LS[1]) is five. Each additional level of symbols consists of four rules, 20 symbols. Thus S(LS[i 

+ 1]) = S(LS[1]) + i * 20 . 20 is a constant , condition a has been met. 

Each nonterminal symbol is expanded to exactly four symbols from the following level therefor T(LS[i + 1]) = 

T(LS[i]) * 4 , condition b has been met. 

# 3 The Experiment 

Overview 

To perform the experiment a population of animats is constructed. Each animat consists of a hebbian /genetic 

ANN, input sensors, and an output register. Based on the contents of the output register the animat has the 

ability to turn, move and collect food. The animats are introduced, one at a time, into an artificial environment, 

and allowed to exist f or a predetermined life span or until starving (not collecting food for a predetermined 

amount of time). The environment consists of open terrain with scattered barriers. Food is distributed 

randomly in the environment before each animat is introduced. Animat performance is measured by the amount 

of food collected in the animat's life span. The ability to avoid barriers is important to an animat's ability to 

collect food. Animats that become stuck on a barrier or continuously bump into barriers do not have the 

opportunity to collect food. 

At the end of a generation (all animats have lived in the environment) GAs will be used to produce the next 

generation of animats from the current generation. The fitness function used for the GA is the performance of 

the animat in the artificial environm ent and is measured by the amount of food collected. 

The purpose of this experiment is twofold. The first is to determine whether genetic algorithms can optimize 

hebbian neural network topologies for a given problem. Optimization will be deemed successful if there is 

significant improvement in network perf ormance from the first generation. The second purpose is to 

experiment with Matrix vs Lsys encoding to determine whether the genetic encoding method has an effect on 

performance. The Matrix and Lsys encoding methods will be used on the same fitness fun ction, with all 

parameters, except those related to the encoding, set the same. Thus any difference in performance should be 

due to the encoding method being used. For a ANN with n neurons Matrix encoding is a O(n 2) encoding 

method. Lsys encoding method is a O(log 2n) encoding method . L-System based encoding methods have been 

shown to provide superior performance over other encoding methods [10]. The predicted result is that Lsys 

encoding will outperform Matrix encoding .

## 3.1 Design 

3.1.1 The environment 

An artificial environment is used to test each animat's neural network performance. The environment consists 

of a 110 by 90 grid of cells. Each cell contains information about it's terrain, food content, and occupant. There 

are two types of terrain, open and barrier. An animat cannot occupy a barrier cell. The outside ring of cells, 

five deep, are barrier cells, locking the animats into their environment. There are 3 world types constructed from 

various configurations of the barriers cells (Figure 4). Open cells can contain one food unit. Food units are 

distributed at random throughout the open cells with a 75% probability at the beginning of each animat's life 10 

span. Food is not added to the environment during the life span of an animat. Time in the environment is 

measured in "clicks". In each click the state of the 13 cells of the environment in front of the animat are 

encoded (Figure 5a) and fed into the animat's neural network as input, the output of the net is decoded (Figure 

5b) and the animat's location and orientation are updated, as well as the new state of the environment. 

Figure 4: Artificial environment s, with food and animat during an animat's life span. Blue cells are barrier, 

cherry’s are food, animat graphic is pac -man . Delay option is to slow the animats down enough to be able to 

observe behavior .

> Resulting input: 10110010111000001110110000

Figure 5a: Encoding of animat input data  

> Output for turning Output for movement
> Example output for moving strait ahead: 0 0 1 0 1 0

Figure 5b: Decoding of animat output data 

3.1.2 Animats 

Animats consist of an input sensor, an output register, a genotype and a hebbian neural network of 256 neurons ,

the topology of which is determined by the animat's genotype. At the beginning of the animat's life span the 

animat's genotype is read, the corresponding hebbian network is built. and the animat is placed at random in the 

environment. Life spans are se t at 8000 clicks, although this could be lowered if the animats become 

sufficiently fit enough to collect all of the food in the environment before the end of their life span. Animats 

that do not collect any food for a continuous 256 clicks are considered to have starved to death and the animat's 

life span is terminated. Animats interface with their environment through the input sensor and output register. 

The input sensor encodes the state of the 13 cells directly in front of the animat, into a binary a rray, ( Figure 5a). 

This array is given to the animat's neural network as input, and the resulting output from the neural net is put 

into the animat's output register. The output register is then decoded to determine the animat's intended 

movement and ori entation, ( Figure 5b). If the movement is legal, i.e. not into a barrier cell, the animat's 

location is updated. In any event the animat's orientation is updated. An animat collects food by moving onto a 

cell which contains food, after which the cell is updated to reflect that it's food content is zero. An animat's 

fitness is calculated by the amount of food collected by the animat in it's life span, higher food counts meaning 

higher fitness. 

## 3.2 Genetics 

Since part of the experiment is to test whether the method used to encode the network topology into a genotype 

affects the performance of the genetic algorithm, genetic operators, (selection, crossover, etc.) are kept as 11 

constant as possible across all encoding methods. Therefor any difference in performance should be due to the 

encoding method used. The experiment uses Matrix and Lsys encoding . The job of the genetic algorithm is to 

optimize the topology of the hebbian networks to improve performance on a particular problem. The animat's 

genotype determines the topology of it's neural network. A genotype will specify the connections between the 

neurons as well as whether each connection is soft (learning) or hard (fi xed weight) connection. If the 

connection is hard the genotype will also specify the weight on the connection. Genotypes are generated 

randomly at the beginning of a run. However the initial number of connections between the neurons, and the 

percentage of hard connections, is controlled. 

3.2.1 Genetic operators 

Elitism will be considered a genetic operator. Counting elitism, four genetic operators are employed in the 

experiment, selection, crossover, mutation, and elitism. Crossover, and elitism are performed in the standard 

manner, however because of the genet ic alphabets chosen the mutation operator has to be customized for each 

encoding method. The selection mechanism is designed to discourage premature conver gence and convergence 

stall late in the run when fitness' tend to vary less. At the end of a genera tion, animats are ordered by their 

fitness. The genotype of the fittest animat is copied into the next generation as child one. Then the genotype is 

mutated and copied to the next generation as child two. The same procedure is performed for the second m ost 

fit animat, with the children being three and four. After this the fittest one fourth of the population is mated 

four times with an animat picked at random from the fittest one third of the population. Half of these children 

are mutated. Mutating on ly half of each population reduces the probability of mutation stall. 

3.2.2 Parameter Settings 

In all genetic programs the values must be chosen for parameters such as the probability of mutation, the 

probability of crossover and the size of the population. These parameters can chosen by educated guess or by 

experimentation. The experiment is comp utationally expensive and therefor only limited experimentation was 

possible. The probability of mutation used for test runs varied from .5% to 2% . Other parameters important to 

this experiment include the learning coefficient for the hebbian learning rule, the connection probability, and 

the hard connection probability. These parameters are kept constant for Matrix vs LSys throughout all the runs. 

The learning coefficient is set at 0.0035, however weights are updated only during the infancy state of an 

animat. The infancy state consists of the first 500 clicks in the life span of an animat. The connection 

probability and hard connection probability are used during the initial random generation of the population at 

the beginning of a run . During mut ation a separate tunable variable is used to control the probability of 

mutation in type of connection. This keeps the mutation itself from driving the number of connections and hard 

connections between neurons upward or downward. 

3.2. 3 Encoding method one (Matrix encoding) 

Encoding method one is based upon the standard neural network connectivity matrix. In addition a second 

component, the weight value of the connection, is added to each cell in the matrix. The number of neurons used 

is 256 therefor the resulting matrix has 256 squared or 65536 cells. Each cell contains both a boolean value, 

zero or one, and one member of the set [ -10 .. 10 , 100 ]. The boolean values specify the connections between 

the neurons. A zero or 100 in the integer value specifies a soft connection. If the integer is no t zero or 100 it is 

divided by 10 to obtain the weight on the correspond ing connection. 

Let n be the number of neurons in the ANN generated by the genotype. Like neural network connectivity 

matrices, the size of genotypes under method two grow at O(n 2). Encoding method one has the advantage 

however of being able to specify every possible network topology. 

A formal definition of Encoding method one is as follows : 

Terminology 

n = number of neurons. 

C = 0 or 1. 12 

W = integer value from the set [ -10 … 10 , 100 ], with 0 meaning a soft connection and 100 meaning 

adult learning soft connection . If W <> 0 or 100 then the associated connection is hard wired with weight 

W/10. 

connection pair = C W, which is expressed as a neural network connectivity matrix. 

3.2. 4 Encoding method two (LSys alphabet encoding) 

Genotypes in encoding method two are sets of L-System productions. Multiple sets of productions per 

genotype can be used. Wp1 hgn uses two productions. The first generates a standard neural network 

connectivity matrix when expanded. The second generates the weight component. Together they are expanded 

to form a connectivity/weight matrix similar to the one used in encoding method one . In order to keep the 

number of neurons constant a constrained L-System model is used. L -symbols are classified by level, with each 

L-symbol expanding to exactly four L -symbols from the level beneath it. This results in expansions of constant 

size. Both sets of productions use the same symbols until layer log₂(n) -1, which contains the terminal symbols. 

The log₂(n) -1 layer in both sets of rules consists of sixteen L -symbols, the set [a..p]. In the first set of rules the 

sixteen symbols are hard coded to expand to the sixteen possible binary strings of length four , this i s the log₂(n) 

connectivity layer . In the second set the log₂(n) layer consists of integer weight values . Genotypes consist of 

multiple strings of L -symbols from each level. Each string is the right side of an L-System production. The left 

side of the L-System productions are implicit in the ordering of the L -symbols. The right side of layer log₂(n) -1

is hard coded in the first set of rules and thus is not included in the genotypes. 

Using Lsys encoding the growth in the size of the genotypes in relation to the number of neurons, n, is 

O(log 2n). 

A formal definition of the L sys GNN encoding alphabet :

Terminology 

Xi = L -symbol variable of level i. 

n = number of neurons. 

W = independently specified integer weight value. 

L-symbols 

A1,B 1,C 1,D 1 = level one L -symbol. 

A2,B 2,C 2,D 2 = level two L -symbol. 

A3,B 3,C 3,D 3 = level three L -symbol. 

A4,B 4,C 4,D 4 = level four L -symbol. 

.... 

Ai,B i,C i,D i = level i L -symbol, where i=log₂(n) -2. 

a,b,c,...,p = terminal level L -symbol , where i=log₂(n) -1.

Each L -symbol from level i is expanded to a string of four L -symbols from level i+1. 

For the final expansion, level log₂(n): 

If the expansion rule set is a connectivity matrix then 

a is expanded to 0 0 0 0 

b is expanded to 0 0 0 1 

c is expanded to 0 0 1 0 

.... 

p is expanded to 1 1 1 1 

If the expansion rule set is a weight matrix then 

a is expanded to W W W W 

b is expanded to W W W W 

c is expanded to W W W W 13 

.... 

p is expanded to W W W W 

An example Lsys encoding genotype for 256 neurons :                                                                        

> [Herbivore 1]
> CABC
> GHEHFEGGHFGEHHGH
> KJIIJKKIIILKIILL
> MNMNMNNNOOMNONOO
> STRRSRQQSQRRTTTR
> WWVWWXVVWUXVXUVV
> dojfedepjdanfmnp
> 00000001001000110100… 1111 <this line is coded, not included in the genotype>
> DDBD
> GHHFEFHEGGEFEGEE
> KKLJLKJLJIIIKJII
> MMONNPOOOOMNMMNO
> RSRTQQRSRTTTRSRR
> WWUUUUWXUXXVUUUU
> dnndddnnbbddindd
> 010 00-45-10 -5100 -2100 -4-5-10 -10 -10 00100 0100 100 -20000000100
> 100 040-10 100 -100000000100 -8100 -80100 -5-10 -4-10 00-30002100

Wp1 hgn use case of W: W = integer value from the set [ -10 … 10, 100], 0 = soft connection, 100 = adult 

learning soft connection. If W <> 0 or 100 then the associated connection is set to hard connection with weight 

W/10. 

Note: the expansion symbols for layers 1 - log₂(n) -2 do not have to necessarily be distinct characters. All 

symbols in layers 1 - log₂(n) -2 can be comprised of the same four distinct characters . Location specifies level. 

3.2. 5 Wp1hgn 

To run the experiment a neural network genetic modeling tool titled Wp1hgn was designed and built. Wp1hgn 

can generate populations of random genotypes of the Matrix and Lsys alphabets with varying parameters and 

and then perform genetic optimization on multiple world types. Options for mutation rate, number of crossover 

points during combination and other parameters can be chosen before or during each run. Wp1hgn will be put 

up on github and  https://www.bio.fsu.edu/astuy/Wp1hgn  , allowing other researchers to test the results. 

3.2. 6 MatrixLSG 

To test whether any increase in performance for Matrix vs Lsys populations is due to the genetic alphabet or the 

initial generation of the random genotypes, an option for generating the initial random Matrix genotypes by first 

generating random Lsys genoty pes and then converting them to Matrix genotypes is available in Wp1hgn. 

## 3.3 Results 

Fitness of the animats (F) is measured by the amount of food units collected in the animats life span. 

Performance of each run is measured by both the maximum and average amount of food collected by the 

animats in a generation, Max(F i), 1 <= i <= popsize (Fi) / popsize, 1 <= i <= popsize , as well as the number 

of generations required to achieve the result. At the beginning of a run performance is very poor, as would be 

expected. Most animats perform tight circles, or crash into barriers and stick. Behavior rapidly improves in the 

first g enerations. The animats learn to move forward and avoid barriers. Actively seeking food is usually the 

last behavior to be learned. Lsys encoding is shown to provide faster and more consistent learning as well as 

more consistent and adaptable behavior .14 

All 8 Lsys populations achieved maximum food collection performance more than twice that of random 

movement animats by generation 1000, with a mean maximum food count of 3802 ± 197 (n=8, CV=5.2%). 

Every Lsys run first exceeded 2000 food collected between g enerations 13 and 33, demonstrating rapid and 

consistent convergence. In contrast, only 4 of 8 Matrix runs ever exceeded 2000 food collected at any point 

during the 1000 generation run, with the earliest occurring at generation 151 and the latest at gene ration 667. 

The remaining 4 Matrix runs never exceeded 2000 food collected, representing complete failure to achieve 

competitive performance. (Figures 6, 7). 

While Matrix encoding occasionally produced competitive animats, performance was highly inconsistent 

across runs. At generation 1000, Matrix encoding achieved a mean maximum food count of 1388 ± 610 (n=8, 

CV=44.0%), compared to 3802 ± 197 for Lsys encoding — a 2.74x advantage in mean performance. The 

coefficient of variation for Matrix encoding (44.0%) was 8.5 times that of Lsys encoding (5.2%), quantifying 

the dramatic difference in reliability between the two encoding methods. Population average food co unt at 

generation 1000 showed a similar pattern: Lsys achieved 3207 ± 181 versus Matrix at 513 ± 252, a 6.3x 

advantage in mean population -wide performance. (Figures 6, 7).

To test the generalization ability of evolved populations, the top 4 populations of each encoding type were 

transferred to Maze world, a novel environment with narrow corridors and dead ends presenting substantially 

different navigational challenges than the RoundedBarrier1 training environment. Each population was run for 

100 generations in the new environment. Lsys populations demonstrated immediate and robust transfer, 

entering Maze world at generation 1 already collecting a mean maximum food count of 2447 and maintaining 

strong performance throughout, finishing at 2455 ± 176 at generation 100. In striking contrast, Matrix 

populations collapsed in the novel environment, achieving a mean maximum food count of only 422 ± 212 at 

generation 100, a 5.82x dis advantage compared to Lsys populations and substantially worse than their already 

poor training world performance. MatrixLSG populations showed intermediate transfer performance of 1274 ± 

506 at generation 100. (Figure 8.) The Lsys advantage over Matrix encoding increased from 2.74x in the 

training environment to 5.82x in the novel environment, demonstrating that Lsys encoding produces not merely 

better optimized but fundamentally more transferable and robust neural network behaviors. 

Figure 6. Lsys vs MatrixLSG vs Matrix: Mean Maximum Food Collected Per Generation 15 

Figure 7. Individual Run Traces: Lsys vs MatrixLSG vs Matrix 

Figure 8. Novel World Transfer Test 

4.0.1 Summary 

A formal L -System based genetic alphabet for neural networks, titled Lsys, that scales at log 2(n) was 

introduced. A neural network genetic modeling tool, Wp1hgn, was introduced as a method for optimizing 

hebbian neural networks using genetic algorithms and testing encoding methods for the neural network 

topologies. An artificial environment was used to test network performance. All runs of the experiment 

resulted in increased network performance in the artificial environment after sufficient generations. By 

combining hebbian ANNs and GAs hebbian ANNs were produced that could successfully navigate an artificial 

environ ment while searching for food. The ANNs were never given teaching data, they evolved an instinctive 

solution to fitness in their environment. 

Two methods for encoding hebbian network topologies were tested , Lsys and Matrix . Lsys encoding 

achieved a mean maximum food count of 3802 ± 197 at generation 1000 compared to 1388 ± 610 for Matrix 

encoding, a 2.74x performance advantage with an 8.5 -fold improvement in consistency. Genotypes generated 

via Lsys and then converted to Matr ix format (MatrixLSG) achieved a mean maximum food count of 1954 ± 

1178 (CV=60.3%), a modest 1.41x improvement over direct Matrix encoding that falls far short of the 2.7 4x 

advantage achieved by full Lsys encoding, showing that the increase in learning for Lsys genotypes is due to the 

genetic algorithm operating on the Lsys genetic alphabet, not the initial generation of the genotypes. Lsys 

encoding also performed dramatically better on novel world types, achieving a mean maximum food count of 

2455 ± 176 in Maze world compared to 422 ± 212 for Matrix encoding, a 5.82x advantage that exceeded the 

2.74x advantage observed in the trainin g environment, demonstrating that Lsys encoding produces 

fundamentally more transferable neural network behaviors. 16 

4.0.2 Conclusions 

The experiment demonstrates that genetic algorithms can successfully optimize hebbian neural networks for 

navigation in an artificial environment without any supplied training data, and that the choice of genetic 

encoding method has a profound effect on bo th the performance and reliability of the optimization process. 

Lsys encoding proved decisively superior to Matrix encoding across all measured dimensions. Lsys 

populations achieved a mean maximum food count of 3802 ± 197 at generation 1000, compared to 1388 ± 610 

for Matrix encoding — a 2.74x performance advantage. More significantly, every Lsys population successfully 

learned to navigate the environment, while 4 of 8 Matrix populations failed to achieve competitive performance 

at any point during 1000 generations. The consistency advantage is s ignificant : Lsys encoding produced a 

coefficient of variation of 5.2% across 8 runs with varied parameters, compared to 44.0% for Matrix encoding ,

8.5 times more variable. This robustness to parameter variation suggests that the Lsys genetic alphabet provides 

structural guidance to the evolutionary search that is largely independent of specific parameter settings. 

The MatrixLSG control condition isolates the source of the Lsys advantage. Populations initialized from Lsys -

generated networks but evolved with Matrix operators achieved a mean maximum food count of 1954 ± 1178 at 

generation 1000 (CV=60.3%), only a modest 1.41x improvement over direct Matrix encoding and far below the 

2.74x advantage of full Lsys encoding. Notably the MatrixLSG coefficient of variation (60.3%) was actually 

higher than that of Matrix encoding (44.0%), confirming that Lsys -structured initi alization alone does not 

provide the consistency advantage seen in full Lsys runs. These results demonstrate that the performance 

advantage of Lsys encoding derives primarily from the genetic algorithm operating continuously on the 

compressed symbolic Lsys alphabet throughout evolution, rather than from the structure of the initial 

population. 

The novel world transfer test further confirms the superiority of Lsys encoding. When transferred to Maze 

world, a novel environment with narrow corridors and dead ends, Lsys populations immediately demonstrated 

robust navigational competence with no adapt ation period, while Matrix populations collapsed to near -random 

performance. The Lsys advantage increased from 2.74x in the training environment to 5.82x in the novel 

environment, suggesting that Lsys encoding produces genuinely general navigational stra tegies rather than 

environment -specific optimizations. MatrixLSG populations again showed intermediate performance (1274 ± 

506), with the stronger training world performers showing meaningful transfer while weaker ones failed, further 

supporting the conclu sion that it is the ongoing operation of genetic operators on the symbolic Lsys alphabet, 

rather than initialization structure alone, that produces robust and transferable learned behaviors. 

These results confirm the theoretical prediction that O(log₂n) symbolic encoding methods can provide superior 

performance over O(n²) direct encoding methods for neuroevolution. The Lsys alphabet introduced in this paper 

provides a practical and highly effe ctive implementation of this principle for hebbian neural networks, 

achieving faster convergence, higher peak performance, dramatically greater reliability, and superior 

generalization to novel environments compared to matrix encoding across all experiment al conditions tested. 

4.0.3 Areas for further research 

Short term: The Lsys genetic alphabet scales at O(log 2n) . Future versions of Wp1hgn will test whether 

learning for Lsys networks scales at O(log 2n) for larger neural network sizes. Wp1hgn currently operates on 

neural neworks of 256 neurons. Capability will be added for Wp1hgn to support neural networks of 512, 1024, 

2048 and 4096 neuron s using the Lsys alphabet . The Lsys alphabet currently supports a very limited variety 

of L -System expansion rules, limiting the expression of possible network topolog ies. Research into semantic 

expansion of the Lsys alphabet may result in further increases in Lsys performance. 

Long term: While this experiment uses Hebbian neural networks , L-System encoding of other types of neural 

networks, including supervised learning models is possible. The current assumption in deep learning is that 

more parameters plus more data equals better performance. This research raises a different question, what if a 

more structured compressed encoding could achieve similar or better performance with fewer parame ters? 17 

4.0.4 Data Availability Statement 

All experimental data files used in this study, including the complete generation -by -generation performance 

records for all 24 training world runs (8 Lsys, 8 Matrix, and 8 MatrixLSG) and all 12 novel world transfer test 

runs, are publicly available at http s://www.bio.fsu.edu/astuy/Wp1hgn/data. The Wp1hgn simulation software, a 

Windows 64 -bit executable with installer, will be made available at the same location and on GitHub, allowing 

other researchers to reproduce and extend these results. 

# References 

[1] J.A. Anderson and E. Rosenfeld, eds. Neurocomputing: Foundations of Research . Cambridge: MIT Press, 

1988. 

[2] A.K. Dewdney. Exploring the Field of Genetic Algorithms in a Primordial Computer Sea Full of Flibs .

Science Magazine. 

[3] Marco Dorigo and Uwe Schnepf. Genetics -Based Machine Learning and Behavior -Based Robotics: A New 

Synthesis . IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Vol. 23, No. 1, January/February 1993. 

[4] Gerald D. Fischbach. Mind and Brain. Scientific American , pages 24 -33, September 1992 

[5] D.B. Fogel, L.J. Fogel, and V.W. Porto. Evolving Neural Networks. Biological Cybernetics, Sprint 1990., 

pages 487 -493. 

[6] John Hertz, Anders Krough, Richard G. Palmer. Introduction to the Theory of Neural Computation .

Addison -Wesley Publishing Company, 1991. 

[7] D.O. Hebb. The Organization of Behaviour . New York: Wiley. Partially reprinted in Anderson and 

Rosenfeld [1988]. 

[8] David E. Goldberg. Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine Learning . Addison -Wesley 

Publishing Company, Inc. 

[9] Geoffrey E. Hinton and Steven J. Nowlan. How Learning Can Guide Evolution . Complex Systems 1 

(1987) pages 495 -502. 

[10] Hiroaki Kitano. Designing Neural Networks Using Genetic Algorithms with Graph Generation System. 

Complex Systems 4 (1990), pages 461 -476. 

[11] H. Muhlenbein and J. Kindermann. The Dynamics of Evolution and Learning -Towards Genetic Neural 

Networks .

Connectionism in Perspective, Elsevier Science Publishers B.V (North -Holland), 1989, pages 174 -197. 

[12] S. Norfi and D. Parisi. Auto -Teaching: Networks that Develop their own Teaching Input. 

[13] Elaine J. Pettit and Michael J. Pettit. Analysis of the Performance of a Genetic Algorithm Based System 

for Message Classification in Noisy 

Environments. Int. J. Man -Machine Studies (1987) 27, pages 205 -220. 

[14] P. Prusinkiewicz and A. Lindenmayer. The Algorithmic Beauty of Plants. Springer Verlaag Inc., New 

York 1990. 

[15] Grzegorz Rozenberg. L-System s. Springer Verlaag Inc., New York 1974. 

[1 6] Krzysztof Pawełczyk, Michal Kawulok, Jakub Nalepa. Genetically -trained deep neural networks. 

GECCO '18: Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference Companion 

Pages 63 – 64  https://doi.org/10.1145/3205651.3208763 

[1 7] Ascoli, G. A., & Krichmar, J. L. (2000). L-neuron: A modeling tool for the efficient generation and 

parsimonious description of dendritic morphology .

Neurocomputing, 32, 1013 -1019.