Title: Sampling at intermediate temperatures is optimal for training large language models in protein structure prediction

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.29529v1

Published Time: Wed, 01 Apr 2026 00:50:32 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
## Sampling at intermediate temperatures is optimal for training large language models in protein structure prediction 

L. Ghiringhelli 

Department of Physics, via Celoria 16, 20133 Milano, Italy 

A. Zambon ∗ and G. Tiana †

Department of Physics and INFN, via Celoria 16, 20133 Milano, Italy 

(Dated: April 1, 2026) We investigate the parameter space of transformer models trained on protein sequence data using a statistical mechanics framework, sampling the loss landscape at varying temperatures by Langevin dynamics to characterize the low-loss manifold and understand the mechanisms underlying the superior performance of transformers in protein structure prediction. We find that, at variance with feedforward networks, the lack of a first–order–like transition in the loss of the transformer produces a range of intermediate temperatures with good learning properties. We show that the parameters of most layers are highly conserved at these temperatures if the dimension of the embedding is optimal, and we provide an operative way to find this dimension. Finally, we show that the attention matrix is more predictive of the contact maps of the protein at higher temperatures and for higher dimensions of the embedding than those optimal for learning. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Large language models, based on the Transformer ar-chitecture [1], have had a significant impact on a broad range of machine learning tasks. In particular, they have affected the field of biophysics, enabling computers to predict the native conformation of proteins from the knowledge of their sequences alone [2, 3]. Despite their significance, the comprehension of their intrinsic mecha-nisms remains significantly less understood than that of feedforward networks. In the case of feedforward networks, a large amount of information is now available about how they work, how they generalise from the training data and how the space of solutions looks like [4–11]. Apart from the fact that it is more cumbersome than training feedforward networks with the same number of parameters, less is known about the learning mechanism of transformers [12]. In one–layer systems, gradient op-timisation was shown to act in two stages, first learning causal relations by amplifying attention weights between words that are distinctive in an example and suppress-ing those between common ones, and then refining the results logarithmically slowly [13, 14]. Remarkably, it was proved analytically that a single transformer learns the couplings of a Potts model in a way that is equivalent to that obtained from pseudolike-lihood learning [15]. Since Potts models describe well the coevolution of amino acids in proteins [16], transformers seem the ideal machine–learning tool to capture proxim-ity relations in proteins. As with the coevolution described by Potts models, transformers can be studied using the formalism of the   

> ∗alessandro.zambon@unimi.it
> †guido.tiana@unimi.it

canonical ensemble, thus treating them in the context of statistical mechanics. This approach has been shown to be effective in the study of feedforward networks. In these networks, the low-loss manifold has been found to be fully connected and to have a spiky shape [11]. In this work, we present results from sampling the pa-rameters of a transformer to better understand how it works and why it efficiently retrieves protein structures. We compare these results with those from a feedforward architecture lacking an attention mechanism. We framed the problem of exploring the parameter space in terms of statistical mechanics to leverage the computational algo-rithms developed in this field, particularly the Langevin equation-based solution scheme that evaluates gradients on mini–batches [17]. We assigned a simple task to the network, that is learn-ing a set of synthetic sequences that fold into a single structure. We chose this task because it is computation-ally efficient enough to collect statistics and draw robust conclusions about the system. This allows us to obtain information about how transformers function in general and their ability to predict protein structures. In the following sections, we show that transformers display an intermediate range of temperatures with op-timal generalization properties, while feedforward net-works have a sharper transition from low to high temper-atures that prevents this regime (Sect. III A). Moreover, we show that the parameters of most layers are highly conserved among models sampled at the optimal tem-perature, provided that the the embedding is properly dimensioned, and we suggest an operative way to find this ideal dimension (Sect. III B). Finally, we show that the attention matrix is more predictive of the contact maps of the protein at temperatures and for dimensions of the embedding that are higher than those optimal for learning (Sect. III C). 

> arXiv:2603.29529v1 [cond-mat.dis-nn] 31 Mar 2026

2

FIG. 1. The structure of acyl–coenzyme A binding protein (pdb code: 2abd), where the contacts between amino acids are indicated with dashed red lines. 

II. DATASET, MODELS AND ALGORITHMS A. The datasets 

The task we addressed is a masked language modeling problem, for a synthetic dataset of amino acid sequences folding to the native structure of the acyl–coenzyme A binding protein (Fig. 1, pdb code: 2abd) [18]. The dataset was generated following the same strategy as in ref. [19]: we defined the energy of a sequence x as 

U (x) = X

> ij

Bxixj ∆ij , (1) where Bxy is a randomly–generated symmetric interac-tion matrix between amino acids, extracted from a Gaus-sian distribution with zero average and unitary variance, while ∆ ij is a binary symmetric contact matrix, derived from the native conformation of the acyl–coenzyme A binding protein so that ∆ ij = 1 if the corresponding amino acids xi and xj have a pair of heavy atoms closer than 3 .5˚ A. In the canonical ensemble framework, we gen-erated 15000 low–temperature ( Ts = 1.27, in energy units) sequences x of length n = 86 with an adaptive simulated tempering algorithm [20]. For each generated sequence xμ, we selected approxi-mately 15% of its amino acids and replaced them with a masking token. The true amino acids in the masked sites were gathered in a vector yμ, which was kept fixed for each sequence. Then, we partitioned the whole dataset 

{(xμ, yμ)}15000  

> μ=1

into three subsets: train, validation and test, composed of 1000, 1000 and 13000 pairs respec-tively. →L                         

> +Ex
> Norm( t) : ωweight ·˜t+ωbias
> ˜t=t→μt
> ωt
> ωweight ,ωbias
> W(QK )
> W(V C )
> A
> →
> +Norm (1)
> W(1)
> +
> W(2) +Norm (2) W(O)
> ˆy
> +ExNorm (1)
> W(r)
> Masked
> Column-Mean g
> g
> g
> g
> Concat axis=1 W(1)
> +
> W(2) +Norm (2) W(O)
> ˆy
> n

FIG. 2. A scheme of the transformer model (upper panel) and 

of the corresponding feed–forward model. The input sequence 

x is mapped to embeddings by E and combined with posi-

tional encoding (icon: white circle with a wavy line). Light-

violet boxes denote trainable linear maps (matrices), while 

circled ”+” and ” →” indicate elementwise addition (residual 

merge) and matrix multiplication, respectively; dashed arrows 

denote skip/residual connections. Transformer block (re-

peated L times). In the attention sub-layer, the attention 

weights A are obtained by first linearly projecting the input 

with W (QK ) and then computing dot products between these 

projected vectors and all input vectors (via the transposed 

input), producing a score for each pair of tokens. A softmax 

(icon: slanted-circle in the attention branch) is applied to 

these scores to yield normalized attention weights, which are 

then used to weight the value projection computed by W (V C ).

The resulting attention output is added to the skip path and 

normalized (learnable layers, e.g., LayerNorm with trainable 

scale and bias). The feed-forward sub-layer applies W (1) fol-

lowed by a ReLU nonlinearity (icon: beige circle with horizon-

tal/diagonal mark), injects positional encoding a second time 

(same wavy-circle icon), and projects through W (2) before 

the residual addition and a second normalization. Pooling-

augmented variant. From the normalized per-site repre-

sentation X ↑ Rn↑d, a masked column-mean over non-masked 

sites produces a global vector g ↑ Rd, which is replicated n

times to form G ↑ Rn↑d (all rows identical). The model con-

catenates x and G along the feature dimension ( Concat axis=1 ), 

yielding [ x|G] ↑ Rn↑2d, and processes the result with the same 

two-layer feed-forward/residual/normalization structure (us-

ing a residual projection W (r) for right residual dimension). 

The final network output is denoted OUT. 

FIG. 2. The scheme of the L-module transformer (upper scheme) and of the feedforward model (lower scheme) used in this work. 

B. The prediction models 

We selected three different architectures to tackle the masked language modeling problem described in Sect. II A. Two of these are transformers [1], made up of either one (TF 1) or four (TF 4) modules in series (upper panel in Fig. 2), and the third is a feedforward network (FF) whose size is approximately equal to that of the 4-module transformer. All of these models follow a three–stage structure com-prising an input construction stage, an encoder and a final output projection layer. The input and output components are the same for the two network families studied here, but the internal encoder differs between transformer-based and feedforward networks. The encoders of transformer-based models use the at-tention mechanism to efficiently capture long-range de-pendencies in the input and produce a context-aware rep-resentation of each input component. In the feedforward encoder, we modeled the architec-ture to resemble a transformer as closely as possible, re-placing only the attention matrix with a pooling layer. This allows us to isolate the effects of the attention mech-anism. Furthermore, each architecture is designed so that all possible permutation symmetries are eliminated with-3out impairing the learning capabilities of the model. The detailed description of each neural network can be found in Appendix A. For a given masked input, each model produces a ma-trix. Every line of the matrix represents the predicted probability distribution over the vocabulary tokens (in this case, amino acid types) for the corresponding site along the sequence. The quality of this prediction has been evaluated using the cross–entropy loss function and the error function (see Appendix B for mathematical de-tails).  

> C. The sampling algorithm

The space of parameters of the system is sampled ac-cording to Boltzmann’s probability, using the loss as the energy of the system and considering it in the canonical ensemble of statistical mechanics. In fact, Boltzmann’s distribution is the maximum-entropy distribution at fixed average loss; sampling the parameter space at different temperatures T allowed us to study the manifold cor-responding to different loss values without biasing the exploration. Moreover, we could take advantage of the large set of theoretical and computational tools devel-oped in the realm of statistical mechanics. Operatively, we first minimized the loss of each net-work with the Adam optimizer (cf. App. C), produc-ing two types of trained weight vectors, namely early-stopped (ES) and over-trained (OT). Then, we sampled the space of all the parameters that define the networks using a norm–constrained version (cf. Appendix D) of the pseudo–Langevin sampling algorithm, recently de-veloped for high–dimensional parameter spaces like those of artificial neural networks [17]. It basically consists of solving the Langevin equations, using approximate forces evaluated on mini–batches and adjusting the fictitious masses associated with the parameters in real time to guarantee that the noise term of the dynamical equations is thermalized at the correct temperature. At each temperature, we could thus collect a large number of sets of parameters, corresponding to differ-ent prediction models. We used these sets to estimate average quantities (such as the average validation error ) and probability distributions (such as the similarity dis-tribution between the parameters of the models).   

> III. RESULTS A. The generalization error is minimal at intermediate temperatures

We compared the sampling of the parameter space of a single–block transformer with that of a four-block trans-former and that of a feed–forward network, acting on the same data with the same task (cf. Sect. II B). For each architecture type, the system is in the overparametrized regime, as clear from the fact that OT solutions and low– temperature weight vectors are associated to a training error equal or close to 0 (Fig. E3b and Table C2 in the appendices). The most apparent difference between transformers and feedforward architectures is in the be-havior of the average loss as a function of the tempera-ture (Fig. 3a). While the feedforward network displays a sharp jump in the loss (corresponding to a sharp peak in the specific heat, Fig. 3b), reminiscent of a first– order phase transition, both transformers display a much smoother shape. For the purposes of comparison, we have normalized the temperature with respect to the temper-ature T1/2 at the maximum in the specific heat (which is architecture–dependent), in order to make the tempera-ture scales of the different models comparable. The accuracy of the prediction on the test set quanti-fies the ability of the model to generalize. The generaliza-tion accuracy for all models has a non-monotonic shape, reaching a maximum right after the transition temper-ature (Fig. 3d). This intermediate–temperature regime can be easily identified on the fly, looking at the error function computed on the validation set (Fig. 3c). In this range of temperatures, the four–block transformer has the greatest generalization ability. In any case, the one– block transformer performs better than the feed-forward architecture, despite the size difference between the two models (cf. Table A1 in the appendices). The OT weigths of TF 1 and FF display loss, training and generalization errors similar to the averages at low temperatures (Fig. 3), in agreement with the expecta-tion that OT corresponds to zero temperature. On the contrary, the OT weights of TF 4, has much lower general-ization error, while the loss is again what expected at zero temperature. The ES weights show an average loss that is similar to that obtained from sampling at intermediate temperatures, and they consistently demonstrate higher generalization ability. However, the average test error 

ϵtest over the ES vectors is always larger than the aver-age at the best temperature (by 0.01 at T best = 1 .3 T1/2

for TF 1, by 0.02 at T best = 1 .1 T1/2 for TF 4 and by 0.04 at T best = 1 .1 T1/2 for FF). Moreover, the variability of the generalization error for different realizations of the ES minimization is much larger than that observed in the sampling at intermediate temperature (error bars in Fig. 3d).  

> B. Varying conservation of the parameters in the different layers

We then examined the variability of the parameters in the different layers of the networks during the sampling. For this purpose, we calculated the distribution of the mutual similarity 

qlt,t ′ = wl(t) · wl(t′)

|wl(t)|| wl(t′)| (2) 40       

> 0.5
> 1
> 1.5
> U T
> (a)
> 0
> 2
> 4
> d U  T/dT  [×10 5] (b) TF 1
> TF 4
> FF
> 0.35
> 0.40
> 0.45
> 0.50
> 0.55
> val  T
> (c)
> ES OT 0.5 11.5 22.5
> T/T1/2
> 0.35
> 0.40
> 0.45
> 0.50
> 0.55
> test  T
> (d)

FIG. 3. Right of the line, the average value of the potential energy ⟨U ⟩T (a), of the specific heat d⟨U ⟩T /dT (b), of the val-idation error ⟨ϵval ⟩T (c), and of the test error ⟨ϵtest ⟩T (d) as functions of the rescaled temperature T /T 1/2 for the models TF 1 (red curves), TF 4 (blue curves) and FF (green curves). Left of the line, the same for early–stopped solutions (ES) and over-trained solutions (OT) obtained with Adam. Cir-cles denote numerical measurements, while solid lines repre-sent spline interpolations. All points have an error bar which indicates the standard deviation. 

of each layer l over the sampling, where wl(t) is the vec-tor containing the parameters of the layer l sampled at time t during a simulation at temperature T best (see Sect. III A). We could compare the weights element–wise be-cause the permutation symmetries of the networks had been broken by construction (see Appendix A). In the one–block transformer, the distribution ρ(ql)of mutual similarity between pairs of models is either peaked around zero or very broad for most layers, indicat-ing that the network can find several sets of parameters that maintain a sufficiently low loss (Fig. E5 in the ap-pendices). There are, however, exceptions. The parame-ters γ(1) weight and γ(2) weight that weight the rows in the nor-malization layers display similarity distribution strongly peaked towards 1, indicating that the values are well con-served throughout the sampling (red curves in the lower panels in Fig. 4). The parameters W (V C ) which control the value layer and E controlling the embedding are also conserved, although their distribution is more broadened than that of the normalization layers (Fig. 4, red curves in the middle panels). The parameters W (O) control-ling the output and the query–key parameters W (QK )

are peaked at intermediate values (Fig. 4, upper panels, red curves). Different layers of TF 1 are then conserved at varying degree at the optimal temperature. In the case of a network made of 4 transformer blocks, the variability of the parameters in each block is very similar to that of the TF 1 system (the distributions for the first layer are shown as blue curves in Fig. 4). An exception is the set of value parameters W (V C ) that is peaked around 0 in the last three blocks (Fig. E5), while it is peaked around 1, as for the single-module architec-ture, only in the first block of the transformer. The distribution of similarities in the layers of the feed-forward network FF (Fig. 4, green curves) is overall quite similar to that of the corresponding layers in the trans-formers, suggesting that their conservation are not a con-sequence of the attention mechanism. The strong conservation of the weights γ(1) weight and 

γ(2) weight in all architectures facilitated the inspection of the values they assume at during the sampling. For the TF 1 model, the distribution is bimodal (Fig. 5, solid red curves), with one peak centered around zero (amount-ing to approximately 60% of the elements for γ(1) weight and 80% of the elements for γ(2) weight ) and the other one around a positive value. Since these vectors have size equal to the embedding dimension d = 64 and they weight the information after the attention matrix, we hypothesized that the elements with value close to zero are essentially useless for the network’s task. have a single-peaked distribution for ES weights, cen-tered at non-zero values. This is similar to the higher peak obtained through sampling for TF 1 (Fig. 5, dashed red curves), which suggests that our hypothesis would not apply to the parameters obtained from loss minimization. To verify the hypothesis, we trained a new network (details in Appendix C), where the dimension of the embedding is reduced to d = 26, corresponding to the elimination of the rows associated with values of γ(1) weight 

close to zero. This new architecture will be referred to as TF 26 1 (cf. Table A1 in the appendices). We per-formed a sampling of the parameters at temperature 

T best ≈ 1.5 T1/2 obtaining an average generalization error of ⟨ϵtest ⟩T best = 0 .40 ± 0.001, which is comparable to that of the original larger model ⟨ϵtest ⟩T best = 0 .38 ± 0.002. As expected, the values assumed by the new weight vec-tors γ(1 /2) weight during the sampling are now distributed ac-cording to a single-peaked distribution at non-zero values (Fig. 5, orange curves) and remain very conserved during the sampling (Fig. 4, orange curves in the lower panels). Moreover, the per–layer similarities of the matrices E,

W (V C ), W (QK ) and W (O) for the compact architecture TF 26 1 are now all peaked toward higher values (Fig. 4, orange curves). This suggests that the high variability these layers had in the larger system was primarily due to their oversized dimensions. Summing up, in a single– 50          

> 5
> 10
> W(O)W(QK )
> 0
> 5
> 10
> W(VC )E
> 00.25 0.5 0.75 1
> ql
> 0
> 5
> 10
> (1) weight
> 00.25 0.5 0.75 1
> ql
> (2) weight
> TF 1
> TF 26 1
> TF 4
> TF 14 4
> FF

FIG. 4. The distributions ρ of the similarity ql of param-eters for some of the layers, obtained by comparing equili-brated configurations at temperature T best for each architec-ture (identified by different colors). The complete set is dis-played in Fig. E5 in the Appendix. The architectures labeled as TF 26 1 and TF 14 4 correspond to transformers of reduced di-mensionality (see text). 

block transformer whose embedding dimension is care-fully tuned, only the layers W (1) , W (2) after the atten-tion and the biases b(0) of the output can vary quite freely along the sampling, while the other layers are essentially fixed. This line of reasoning can also be applied to the TF 4 ar-chitecture. We examined the distributions of the values assumed by the vectors γ(1 /2) weight in the last transformer block, observing that they have qualitatively the same distribution we identified in the single–block model (Fig. 5, blue curves). Again, we trained a new network with a reduced embedding dimension d = 14 (called TF 14 4 ), cor-responding to the number of non–zero values of γ(1) weight 

in the last block. The sampling at T best ≈ 1.7 T1/2 of the parameters of this reduced architecture show a dis-tributions ρ



γ(1 /2) weight 



which is unimodal and centered at non–zero values (Fig. 5, purple curves). The average generalization error is ⟨ϵtest ⟩T best = 0 .36 ± 0.002, compa-rable to that of the TF 4 (i.e. ⟨ϵtest ⟩T best = 0 .33 ± 0.004). The similar generalization ability occurs in spite of the huge difference in size between the two models (cf. Ta-ble A1 in the appendices). For the different layers of TF 14 4 the similarity of the sampled parameters is overall smaller than for the one–block architecture, but is any-how larger, in general, than 0 .5, with the exception of biases which can vary much from model to model (Fig. 4, purple curves). 

C. The attention matrix is optimal at higher temperatures and larger embeddings 

When applied to the structure prediction of proteins, a key property of transformers is that their attention ma-trix resembles the adjacency matrix of the input sequence [21]. For the one–block transformer TF 1, the mean atten-tion matrix (i.e., the attention matrix symmetrized and averaged over the test set sequences) for models sampled at intermediate temperatures ( T = 2 T1/2) resembles the experimental contact map (cf. upper panels in Fig. 6 and Fig. E2 in the appendices). However, the same is not true for the mean matrices associated with ES or OT vectors (cf. Fig. E4a and b, respectively). The mean attention matrix can be regarded as a self–averaging quantity, since individual models sampled at the same temperature pro-duce mean matrices which are very similar to each other (e.g., Fig. E4d, f, g in the appendices). The mean attention matrix of one of the blocks of the TF 4 model has a better similarity to the experimental contact map (lower panels in Fig. 6) than that of TF 1.In this example, the map giving the improved agreement is that belonging to the third attention block of a model sampled at T = 1 .1 T1/2. The mean attention matrix can capture most contacts within alpha–helices and many tertiary contacts. Most false–positive contacts are actu-ally between residues that are adjacent to residues form-ing true contacts. The mean attention matrices belonging to the other blocks are very dissimilar from the contact map of the protein (cf. Fig. E4j, k, l in the appendices). In an-other independent sampling we conducted, the mean ma-trix that resembled the experimental contact map ranged from the third to the fourth. The mean attention matrix of the best–matching block seems self–averaging also in the TF 4 model (e.g., Fig. E4m, n, o). At variance with the TF 1 model, in the TF 4 also ES and OT give mean matrices reasonably predictive of the contact map, though they perform worse than those ob-tained through sampling (cf. with Fig. E4g, h with Fig. E4m, n, o). A metric commonly used to assess the model capa-bility of predicting protein contacts is the ’precision at L’ (P@L) [22], which is the fraction of correct contacts predicted from the highest L elements of the attention matrix. In the present case, the metric is computed on the mean attention matrices, with L = 86 (i.e. the length of the protein sequence). The fraction of correctly pre-dicted contacts in the case of very large language models ranges typically between 0.4 and 0.6 [23]. We calculated the P@L metric by averaging over the models sampled at each temperature for both TF 1 and the best–matching block of TF 4. We repeated the same calculation for the ES and OT solutions (Fig. 7a). How-ever, we observe that this metric does not recapitulate the intuition that TF 4 is more predictive than TF 1, as suggested by Fig. 6. In fact, the P@L prioritizes, in the 60

# 1 (a) 

# 1 0 1 2 3

> (1) weight

# 0

# 1.5 

# 0

# 2 (b) 

# 1 0 1 2 3

> (2) weight

# 0

# 1            

> TF 1
> TF 26 1
> TF 4
> TF 14 4
> FIG. 5. The distribution ρof the values of γ(1) weight (a) and γ(2) weight (b) obtained from the sampling at Tbest of the original and reduced transformers (solid lines). The dotted red lines indicate the distribution of γ(1 /2) weight values obtained from the ES minimization. The values reported for the four–module transformers refer to the last module.

list of the L top scores, contacts close to the diagonal, not providing a metric that quantifies the ability of the mean attention matrices to predict the contact map as a whole. To solve this problem, we introduce a new metric, P@L ∆NT , which takes into account the contacts between residues i and j only if |j − i| > 7. Additionally, it defines a predicted contact ( ip, j p) as correct if it is within an interval ∆ from a true contact ( it, j t) (i.e., if 

|ip −it|+|jp −jt| ≤ ∆). According to the new metric, TF 4

is more predictive at all intermediate temperatures than TF 1 (Fig. 7b). The overall lower values of P@L 1NT with respect to P@L are due to the the fact that the former is agnostic of the alpha–helices, which are anyway easy to predict with other algorithms [24]. Increasing the value of ∆ in the definition of P@L ∆NT does not change quali-tatively the results, just shifting the curves upwards (cf. Fig. E7). For the TF 1 and TF 4 architectures, the mean atten-tion matrices obtained by sampling perform much better than those obtained from training (Fig. 7b, blue and red points). This improvement is smaller (for TF 26 1 ) or ab-sent (for TF 14 4 ) for transformer with reduced embedding dimension. Interestingly, there is not a straightforward correlation between generalization error and contacts prediction ca-pability (cf. Fig. 3d and Fig. 7b). The values of P@L 1NT 

for the TF 4 model stay constantly high in the whole range of intermediate temperatures, whereas ⟨ϵtest ⟩T increases shortly after T1/2. For the TF 1 architecture the best– matching mean attention matrices are found at temper-atures consistently higher than T1/2. We then conclude that the temperatures which provide predictive attention matrices do not match those at which the prediction of the protein sequence is optimal. The models with a reduced embedding dimension d

(i.e. TF 26 1 and TF 14 4 ) exhibit a similar behavior. How-ever, their performance is clearly worse (Fig. 7b). Thus, while these minimal models can reproduce protein se-quences as well as those with a larger embedding dimen-sion, their ability to predict contact maps is much poorer. This further points to the fact that contact prediction (for which the network has not been trained) is not com-pletely correlated with sequence prediction. Modifying the models to improve the training and the generaliza-tion error thus is not a good strategy to improve the predictivity of the attention matrix. This is also con-firmed by the better performance of the OT models with respect to the ES solutions for almost every architecture (and especially for TF 4 and TF 14 4 , Fig. 7b).  

> IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

Transformers are a widespread tool used for many tasks, most notably in large language models and protein structure prediction. They are extremely powerful and have surpassed feed-forward and recurrent networks in many areas, yet a deep understanding of how they work is lacking. In this regard, statistical mechanics has been useful in elucidating the working mechanisms of several artificial neural network architectures [4–11]. In order to clarify how transformers function in protein structural prediction, we explored the parameter space of transformers that were trained to recognize protein sequences. Our goal is to understand why transformers are so efficient by exploring the low-loss manifold of the system. The most efficient way to do this is to sample the parameter space at a low temperature in the canoni-cal ensemble. This transforms the problem into the realm 7TF 1TF 4          

> FIG. 6. Left column, the mean attention matrix, symmetrized and averaged over the test set sequences, for the TF 1(upper row) and for the TF 4(lower row) models, obtained during a sampling a temperature T= 2 T1/2and T= 1 .1T1/2respectively. Center column, the contact map obtained from the mean attention matrix using P@L; true positives are in blue, false positives in pink and false negatives in gray. Right column, the contact map obtained from the mean attention matrix using P@L 1NT .

of statistical mechanics, allowing us to use computational algorithms developed in this field over the last fifty years. Specifically, we employed a type of molecular dynamics in the parameter space driven by approximate Langevin equations, which are highly effective for sampling artifi-cial neural networks [17]. We studied small transformers made of either one or four blocks for the simple task of learning to fold syn-thetic sequences into a single native structure. This al-lowed us to explore the space of parameters in detail un-der different conditions without being strongly limited by computational constraints. Of course, we cannot yet de-termine how our results scale for larger transformers and more ambitious tasks, such as learning the structure of all known proteins. Moreover, sequences were generated artificially by energy minimization on the native confor-mation to have the only property of folding [19, 25], and thus display simpler features than real sequences, which have undergone natural evolution satisfying many other biological requirements. An interesting feature that emerges from our calcu-lations is a wide range of intermediate temperatures at which the generalization capability of the transformer is particularly high, as testified by lower values in test error. Basically, the generalization error is a non–monotonic function of the temperature. At lower temperatures, the loss and the training error are smaller, but also the abil-ity to generalize is smaller. In this respect, transform-ers behave quite differently from feedforward networks with similar number of parameters and similar architec-ture, but lacking the attention mechanism. Feedforward networks display a sharp transition in the average loss (and consequently in the training error) with respect to temperature from a low–temperature state with good training but bad generalization accuracy (i.e., the net-work interpolates the data), to an higher–temperature state where the training error increases drastically. This behavior seems to affect feedforward networks indepen-dently of their detailed architecture and task [11]. On the contrary, in transformers the transition is smooth, and does not appear to sharpen increasing the size of the network, generating a wide range of temperatures where the training error is still small enough and where gener-alization is more efficient. This behavior explains why the typical large language models work so well despite being largely under–trained 80         

> 0.5
> 1
> P@L
> (a)
> ES OT 0.5 11.5 22.5 10
> T/T1/2
> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> P@L 1NT
> (b)
> TF 1
> TF 4
> TF 26 1
> TF 14 4
> FIG. 7. The average and standard deviation of the P@L (a) and of the P@L 1NT (b) metrics for ES and OT vectors (left of the line) and for models obtained from sampling at different rescaled temperatures T /T 1/2, for each architecture type.

[26]. Due to the huge number of parameters, it would anyway be impossible to minimize their loss to a state corresponding to the low-temperature states observed in our system. Instead, their optimization approaches the wide intermediate-temperature region that is associated with better generalization. However, further improve-ments are observed during sampling when this region is properly explored using equilibrium statistical mechanics tools. From the the sampling at intermediate temperatures we also learn that most layers of the transformer can be highly variable from model to model. Similarly, the feed-forward network that we use as a control displays similar patters, therefore this behavior does not depend on the attention mechanism. A group of particularly conserved parameters are the ones associated with normalization layers, whose value distribution assumes a bimodal shape with one peak centered around zero during samplings in the intermediate temperature range. Since these vec-tors have dimension d equal to the embedding size, the peak centered around higher values identifies the mini-mal dimension needed to obtain good performances on the masked token prediction task. In the minimal model obtained from decreasing the size of the embedding, the parameters of several layers become significantly more conserved along the sampling compared to those of the larger model. The matrices defining the embedding, the query/key, the value, the normalization and the output have little freedom to vary in the one–block transformer, and somewhat more in the multi–block architecture. Only the biases are really free to vary. The fact that the attention matrix is similar to the con-tact map of proteins is a useful byproduct of transform-ers trained with amino acid sequences [21]. The sampling at intermediate temperatures produce attention matrices that are more similar to the experimental contact map than loss optimization. This is true for both transformer architectures we studied, although in the case of multi– blocks one faces the problem of identifying a priori what block has the most informative attention matrix. Inter-estingly, transformers sampled at temperatures higher than those optimal for training and testing sequences, produce attention matrices which are more similar to the experimental contact map. Over–trained solutions seem to perform better in the prediction of native contacts than early–stopped ones. The reduction of the dimen-sion of the embedding that have little effect on the ability of the transformer to learn protein sequences, decreases the ability to predict the contact map. The misalign-ment between conditions that favors sequence learning and those that favors the prediction of the contact map is not unexpected. As a matter of fact, the network is not trained to reproduce the latter. We can speculate that at higher temperatures or for larger embeddings, it is more difficult for the transformer to predict protein sequences out of noise, and this requires a more selective representation of the correlations between amino acids; the attention matrix is then expected to be cleaner and more similar to the contact map. Finally, we suggest that the Langevin strategy we used in this study can be an efficient tool for optimization of large language models, as it provides configurations with better predictive capabilities for both problems, i.e., masked token prediction and native contacts prediction. A proper tuning of the temperature in the intermediate-to-high range could help find models with better gener-alization properties. 

> DATA AVAILABILITY

The codes used for the sampling can be downloaded at https://github.com/guidotiana/PseudoLangevin .The data generated by our sampling algorithm are avail-able at https://doi.org/10.13130/RD_UNIMI/J1TOFK .

> ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank Riccardo Zecchina for his valu-able discussions and suggestions. 9

[1] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, Attention Is All You Need, arXiv (2023). [2] J. Jumper, R. Evans, A. Pritzel, T. Green, M. Fig-urnov, O. Ronneberger, K. Tunyasuvunakool, R. Bates, A. ˇZ´ ıdek, A. Potapenko, A. Bridgland, C. Meyer, S. A. A. Kohl, A. J. Ballard, A. Cowie, B. Romera-Paredes, S. Nikolov, R. Jain, J. Adler, T. Back, S. Petersen, D. Reiman, E. Clancy, M. Zielinski, M. Steinegger, M. Pacholska, T. Berghammer, S. Bodenstein, D. Silver, O. Vinyals, A. W. Senior, K. Kavukcuoglu, P. Kohli, and D. Hassabis, Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold, Nature 596 , 583 (2021). [3] Z. Lin, H. Akin, R. Rao, B. Hie, Z. Zhu, W. Lu, N. Smetanin, R. Verkuil, O. Kabeli, Y. Shmueli, A. D. Santos Costa, M. Fazel-Zarandi, T. Sercu, S. Candido, and A. Rives, Evolutionary-scale prediction of atomic level protein structure with a language model, bioRxiv , 2022.07.20.500902 (2022). [4] H. S. Seung, H. Sompolinsky, and N. Tishby, Statistical mechanics of learning from examples, Physical Review A 

45 , 6056 (1992). [5] R. Monasson and D. O’Kane, Domains of Solutions and Replica Symmetry Breaking in Multilayer Neural Net-works, Europhysics Letters 27 , 85 (1994). [6] Y. Bahri, J. Kadmon, J. Pennington, S. S. Schoenholz, J. Sohl-Dickstein, and S. Ganguli, Statistical mechanics of deep learning, Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics 11 , 501 (2020). [7] C. Baldassi, A. Ingrosso, C. Lucibello, L. Saglietti, and R. Zecchina, Subdominant Dense Clusters Allow for Sim-ple Learning and High Computational Performance in Neural Networks with Discrete Synapses, Physical Re-view Letters 115 , 128101 (2015). [8] C. Baldassi, C. Borgs, J. T. Chayes, A. Ingrosso, C. Lu-cibello, L. Saglietti, and R. Zecchina, Unreasonable ef-fectiveness of learning neural networks: From accessible states and robust ensembles to basic algorithmic schemes, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113 ,E7655 (2016). [9] J. W. Rocks and P. Mehta, Memorizing without overfit-ting: Bias, variance, and interpolation in overparameter-ized models, Physical Review Research 4, 013201 (2022). [10] S. Becker, Y. Zhang, and A. A. Lee, Geometry of En-ergy Landscapes and the Optimizability of Deep Neural Networks, Physical Review Letters 124 , 108301 (2020). [11] A. Zambon, E. M. Malatesta, G. Tiana, and R. Zecchina, Sampling the space of solutions of an artificial neural network, Physical Review E 112 , 045303 (2025). [12] L. Liu, X. Liu, J. Gao, W. Chen, and J. Han, Under-standing the Difficulty of Training Transformers, arXiv (2023). [13] Y. Tian, Y. Wang, B. Chen, and S. Du, Scan and Snap: Understanding Training Dynamics and Token Composi-tion in 1-layer Transformer, arXiv (2023). [14] E. Nichani, A. Damian, and J. D. Lee, How Transform-ers Learn Causal Structure with Gradient Descent, arXiv (2024). [15] R. Rende, F. Gerace, A. Laio, and S. Goldt, Mapping of attention mechanisms to a generalized Potts model, Physical Review Research 6 (2024). [16] F. Morcos, A. Pagnani, B. Lunt, A. Bertolino, D. S. Marks, C. Sander, R. Zecchina, J. N. Onuchic, T. Hwa, and M. Weigt, Direct-coupling analysis of residue coevo-lution captures native contacts across many protein fam-ilies, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 

108 (2011). [17] A. Zambon, F. Caruso, R. Zecchina, and G. Tiana, Controlled Langevin Dynamics for Sampling of Feedfor-ward Neural Networks Trained with Minibatches, arXiv (2026). [18] B. B. Kragelund, C. V. Robinson, J. Knudsen, C. M. Dobson, and F. M. Poulsen, Folding of a four-helix bun-dle: studies of acyl-coenzyme a binding protein, Bio-chemistry 34 , 7217 (1995). [19] G. Franco, M. Cagiada, G. Bussi, and G. Tiana, Statis-tical mechanical properties of sequence space determine the efficiency of the various algorithms to predict inter-action energies and native contacts from protein coevo-lution., Physical Biology 16 , 046007 (2019). [20] G. Tiana and L. Sutto, Equilibrium properties of realistic random heteropolymers and their relevance for globular and naturally unfolded proteins., Physical Review E 84 ,61910 (2011). [21] R. Rao, J. Meier, T. Sercu, S. Ovchinnikov, and A. Rives, Transformer protein language models are unsupervised structure learners, bioRxiv 2020-12 (2020). [22] R. Rao, J. Liu, R. Verkuil, J. Meier, J. F. Canny, P. Abbeel, T. Sercu, and A. Rives, MSA Transformer, in Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR 139 (2021). [23] J. Vig, A. Madani, L. R. Varshney, C. Xiong, R. Socher, and N. F. Rajani, BERTology Meets Biology: Interpret-ing Attention in Protein Language Models, in ICLR 2021 Conference (2021) pp. 1–24. [24] L. J. McGuffin, K. Bryson, and D. T. Jones, The PSIPRED protein structure prediction server, Bioinfor-matics 16 , 404 (2000). [25] E. I. Shakhnovich and A. M. Gutin, Engineering of sta-ble and fast-folding sequences of model proteins., Pro-ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 90 , 7195 (1993). [26] J. Hoffmann, S. Borgeaud, A. Mensch, E. Buchatskaya, T. Cai, E. Rutherford, D. d. L. Casas, L. A. Hendricks, J. Welbl, A. Clark, T. Hennigan, E. Noland, K. Mil-lican, G. v. d. Driessche, B. Damoc, A. Guy, S. Osin-dero, K. Simonyan, E. Elsen, J. W. Rae, O. Vinyals, and L. Sifre, Training Compute-Optimal Large Language Models, arXiv (2022). [27] J. Thickstun, The transformer model in equations, https://johnthickstun.com/docs/transformers.pdf (2020). 10 

> Appendix A: The models

The architectures considered in this study follow a common three-stage structure: an input construction stage, an encoder, and a final output projection layer. The input and output components are identical for the two network families studied here, while the internal en-coder differs between transformer-based and feedforward models.  

> 1. Embedding

All models operate on sequences x = ( x1, . . . , x n) of 

n discrete tokens drawn from a finite vocabulary. The latter is composed of 20 amino acid tokens and a special masking symbol added to represent missing or hidden tokens in the input sequence. Its cardinality is therefore 

|V | = 21. In the input stage, each token xi ∈ { 1, . . . , |V |} is rep-resented by a one-hot vector exi ∈ { 0, 1}|V | whose xi-th component is equal to 1 and all other components are 0, and then is mapped to a continuous vector representa-tion through an embedding layer. Given an embedding matrix E ∈ R|V |× d, the embedded representation of the token is obtained as 

x(E) 

> i

= E⊤exi ∈ Rd, (A1) producing a matrix sequence representation as X(E) ∈

Rn×d, where n denotes the sequence length and d the embedding size. After the embedding, positional infor-mation is added through standard sinusoidal positional encoding [1], 

P (z) 

> k, 2r

= sin 

 k

10000 2r/z 



, P (z) 

> k, 2r+1

= cos 

 k

10000 2r/z 



,

(A2) with P (z) ∈ Rn×z . This yields the common encoder input ˜X = X(E) + P (d). (A3)  

> 2. Compact transformer encoder

The first encoder considered in this work is a simplified compact transformer inspired by the standard architec-ture in ref. [27]. Let ˜X ∈ Rn×d denote the input representation of a given encoder block. The self-attention mechanism com-putes interactions between embedded tokens through a bilinear form 

A = softmax ˜XW (QK ) ˜X⊤

√d

!

∈ Rn×n, (A4) where the softmax is applied row-wise, and where the matrix W (QK ) ≡ W (Q)(W (K))T ∈ Rd×d represents the combined query–key transformation. The attention weights are then used to aggregate token information as follows 

U (0) = A ˜XW (V C ) ∈ Rn×d (A5) with W (V C ) ≡ W (V )W (C) ∈ Rd×d as the combined value-output projection matrix. This contribution is added to the residual branch and normalized 

U = Norm (1) ( ˜X + U (0) ), (A6) where “Norm” denotes layer normalization applied inde-pendently to each token representation. Given a generic matrix V ∈ Ra×b, the normalization is performed row-wise, i.e. independently for each vector Vi ∈ Rb. For the 

i-th row, we compute 

μi = 1

b

> b

X

> j=1

Vij , σ2 

> i

= 1

b

> b

X

> j=1

(Vij − μi)2, (A7) and the normalization layer output is then Norm( V )ij = Vij − μi

σi

(γweight )j + ( γbias )j , (A8) with γweight , γbias ∈ Rb being learnable vectors applied element-wise along the feature dimension. The subsequent feedforward stage expands the repre-sentation to a higher-dimensional space 

H = U W (1) + b(1) ∈ Rn×m (A9) where m represents the size of the hidden feedforward layer, and where W (1) ∈ Rd×m and b(1) ∈ Rm are the associated weight matrix and bias vector respectively. After applying a non-linearity, an additional positional contribution is introduced in the hidden representation ˜H = ReLU( H) + P (m). (A10) where the function ReLU( x) = max(0 , x ) is applied element-wise. The representation is then projected back to the model dimension 

Z(0) = ˜HW (2) + b(2) ∈ Rn×d (A11) where W (2) ∈ Rm×d and b(2) ∈ Rd are the weight ma-trix and the bias vector of the second hidden feedforward layer of size d.Lastly, the output of the encoder block is obtained through a second residual connection followed by a nor-malization 

Z = Norm (2) (U + Z(0) ) ∈ Rn×d (A12) which represents the contextualized token representation produced by the block. 11 The encoder described above corresponds to a single transformer block. To increase the expressive capacity of the model, multiple identical blocks can be composed sequentially. Let L denote the depth of the encoder, or the number of stacked blocks. Given an input representa-tion, the output of each block is used as the input for the next block. Thus, the full encoder is obtained by com-posing L transformations. The stacked blocks share the same functional form, yet they have separate, trainable parameters.  

> 3. Feed-forward encoder

The second type of encoder can be interpreted as a feed-forward network with an organization similar to that of a transformer. It has the same residual structure as the transformer block but replaces the attention mechanism with a simpler global context aggregation step. Rather than computing pairwise token interactions through an attention matrix, contextual information is introduced via a pooling operation over the sequence. This differ-ence makes the model a useful baseline for isolating the contribution of self-attention and, more generally, of ex-plicit contextualization mechanisms. Starting from the shared input representation ˜X (see Eq. (A3)), the first step consists of applying layer nor-malization independently to each token representation, 

U = Norm (1) ( ˜X). (A13) This normalization stabilizes the representation and en-sures that feature magnitudes are comparable across po-sitions. The next step is to construct a simple form of contextual information shared by the whole sequence, ex-tracting a global summary from the visible tokens only. More precisely, given a binary visibility mask χ ∈{0, 1}n, where χi = 0 for masked positions and 1 other-wise, we define the global context vector g as the column-wise average of the representations of the visible tokens, 

g = 1

Pni=1 χinX

> i=1

χi Ui ∈ Rd. (A14) The vector g provides a coarse summary of the sequence based only on unmasked tokens, and it is then broadcast to all positions, 

G = 1ng⊤ ∈ Rn×d. (A15) The local representation U and the global broadcast context G are finally concatenated along the feature di-mension, 

S = [ U G ] ∈ Rn×2d. (A16) Through this construction, each token receives both its local features and a shared global summary of the se-quence. This pooling mechanism provides a simple form of contextualization that replaces the pairwise interac-tions produced by the attention matrix in the transformer encoder (see Eq. (A4)). Then, similarly to the transformer encoder, a two-layer feedforward transformation is applied. The first linear projection expands the representation to an internal di-mension m,

H = SW (1) + b(1) ∈ Rn×m (A17) where W (1) ∈ R2d×m and b(1) ∈ Rm are the weight ma-trix and bias vector of the first hidden layer. A non-linearity is applied and then a positional contri-bution is introduced in the hidden representation, ˜H = ReLU( H) + P (m). (A18) The hidden representation is then processed by a sec-ond linear transformation within the internal space, 

F = ReLU( ˜HW (2) + b(2) ) ∈ Rn×m (A19) where once more W (2) ∈ Rm×m and b(2) ∈ Rm are the weight matrix and the bias vector of the second feedfor-ward layer. In parallel, a residual projection of the normalized in-put is computed, 

R = U W (r) + b(r) ∈ Rn×m (A20) with W (r) ∈ Rd×m and b(r) ∈ Rm. The encoder out-put is then obtained by combining the two streams and applying a normalization layer 

Z = Norm (2) (R + F ). (A21) In contrast to the transformer architecture, this feed-forward encoder is implemented using a single block and no stacking is considered. Therefore no depth parameter 

L is introduced for this model.  

> 4. Output

After the input construction stage, the encoder trans-forms the input representation into contextual features that capture dependencies between sequence positions. The encoder output is a sequence of hidden representa-tions 

Z ∈ Rn×h, (A22) where h denotes the dimensionality of the internal rep-resentation. The precise transformation that produces Z

depends on the specific encoder architecture described in the previous sections. In the final stage, the encoded representation is pro-jected back into the vocabulary space through a linear transformation, ˆyi = ( W (O))⊤Zi + b(O), (A23) 12 where W (O) ∈ Rh×| V | and b(O) ∈ R|V |. The resulting vector ˆ yi ∈ R|V | contains the model scores associated with each vocabulary token for the site i along the input sequence.  

> 5. Details and hyperparameters of our models

All models share the same input embedding and out-put projection layers introduced in the previous section and differ only in the internal encoder. This makes it possible to compare architectures while keeping the in-put representation and prediction head fixed. We consider two transformer-based models, obtained by stacking identical encoder blocks with depth L ∈{1, 4}. In both cases, the embedding dimension is fixed to d = 64 and the internal feed-forward width to m =4d = 256. These two configurations allow us to compare a shallow and a deeper transformer while preserving the same block structure. In addition, we consider two smaller transformer-based model, again with one module (with d = 26 and 

m = 4 d = 104) and four modules (with d = 14 and 

m = 4 d = 56), whose embedding size d is derived from the Boltzmann sampling of their respective larger coun-terparts (see Sect. III B). As a baseline, we also consider a feed-forward-based model. For this model, the dimensions are fixed to d = 64 and m = 320. The size of the first feedforward layer m

is chosen so that the total number of trainable parame-ters is comparable to that of the bigger transformer (i.e. 

L = 4 and d = 64). In this way, the comparison isolates the effect of attention while keeping the overall parame-ter scale similar. The resulting model configurations are summarized in Table A1.                  

> Encoder Type LdmParams [×10 3]Transformer 1 26 104 8Transformer 1 64 256 44 Transformer 4 14 56 9Transformer 4 64 256 169 Feed-forward -64 320 174 TABLE A1. Model configurations and number of trainable parameters.

Lastly, it should be noted that both encoder architec-tures have slight modifications to their typical compo-sitions. For example, in the transformer-based encoder, we merged the query and key matrices (see Eq. (A4)) and the value and output matrices (see Eq. (A5)). Ad-ditionally, we applied an extra positional encoding to the output of the first hidden layer for both architectures (see Eq. (A18) and Eq. (A10)). These modifications were made to eliminate all possible permutation symme-tries within the studied models, without strongly affect-ing their learning capabilities (see Tab. C2). 

> Appendix B: Observables

Let’s consider a neural network model among the ones previously described (Appendix A 5) and let’s call w the weight vector representing all its parameters. The quality of the prediction of the NN over a dataset D (as the one defined in Sect. II A) is evaluated using two quantities: the cross–entropy loss function and the error function. For a given pair ( x, y), let M ⊂ { 1, . . . , n } denote the set of associated masked indices, and let ˆ yi ∈ R|V | be the vector of output scores for the masked position i (see Appendix A 4). For the selected input-label pair, the cross–entropy loss is defined as 

ℓCE (w|(x, y)) = − 1

|M| 

X 

> i∈M |V|

X

> v=1

eyi,v , log  softmax(ˆ yi)v

,

(B1) where eyi ∈ { 0, 1}|V | denotes the one–hot encoded vector representing the true amino acid at masked site i. Anal-ogously, the global loss function is obtained by averaging over all the pairs, that is 

L(w|D ) = 1

P

> P

X

> μ=1

ℓCE (w|(xμ, yμ)) , (B2) which in our case coincides with the potential energy 

U (w|D ) associated with the weight vector w, as no reg-ularization terms were added. From the same ˆ yi vector, we can define the most prob-able amino acid at the masked position i as ˆci = argmax v [softmax(ˆ yi)v ] . (B3) with ˆ ci ∈ V being a token from the vocabulary. The masked–token accuracy evaluated on the ( x, y) pair is then 

a (w|(x, y)) = 1

|M| 

X

> i∈M

1[ˆ ci = yi] . (B4) As before, the global error function can be computed by averaging over all the input-label couples in the dataset, 

ϵ (w|D ) = 1

P

> P

X

> μ=1

[1 − a (w|(xμ, yμ))] . (B5) 

> Appendix C: Training algorithms

All models are trained using standard optimization techniques commonly adopted for transformer-based ar-chitectures [1]. Both the transformer-based and the feed-forward models are optimized with Adam, using momen-tum parameters ( β1, β 2) = (0 .9, 0.98) and ϵ = 10 −9. The learning rate follows the standard schedule, consisting of 13 a linear warm-up phase followed by inverse square-root decay. At optimization step t, the learning rate is 

η(t) = d−1/2 min 



t−1/2, ts −3/2

, (C1) where d denotes the embedding dimension and s = 4000 is the number of warm-up steps. A dropout rate of pdrop = 0 .1 is used throughout, fol-lowing the placement adopted in the original transformer: dropout is applied to the input embeddings, to the out-puts of attention and feed-forward sublayers. No addi-tional explicit regularization term is introduced during training. We adopt a two-stage training protocol. In the first stage, multiple independent instances of each model are trained with early–stopping based on validation cross-entropy. From the ensemble of trained networks, we compute the empirical distribution of the squared norm of the parameter vectors, |w|2, and estimate its mean value, with w denoting the full vector of trainable pa-rameters of the network. For each architecture, the first stage is repeated over 10 independent runs with different random initializations. The resulting training dynamics and norm evolution across independent runs are shown in Fig. C1. In the second stage, we train three final reference mod-els for each architecture type while explicitly monitoring 

|w|2. Training is interrupted as soon as the squared norm reaches the mean value estimated in the first stage for the corresponding model class, to save the reached con-figuration (ES models). Then, each training procedure continues without any norm constraints up until both the cross–entropy function and the error function evalu-ated on the train set saturate (OT models). The perfor-mances of ES and OT models for each architecture type are summed up in Tab. C2. The ES models for each studied architecture are then employed as starting points in the samplings at fixed norm performed using the Constrained pseudo-Langevin algorithm (see Appendix D). 

> Appendix D: The sampling algorithm

The pseudo–Langevin (pL) algorithm [17] is an approx-imate integrator of the Langevin stochastic differential equations of motion. It produces a dynamics in the phase space ( w, p), with p being the momenta associated with the weight vector w, which efficiently samples the Boltz-mann equilibrium distribution at a certain temperature 

T .We modified the pL sampling scheme, in order to per-form a norm–constrained dynamics in the space of the weights of the neural network. Imposing a constant norm for the vector of parameters w at all times during inte-gration can be translated into two equations, that is one for the holonomic constraint 

C(w) = |w|2 − Q = 0 , (D1) 0            

> 0.5
> 1
> train
> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> val
> TF 1
> TF 26 1
> TF 4
> TF 14 4
> FF
> 10 010 110 210 310 4
> Epochs
> 1000
> 2000
> 3000
> |w|2
> FIG. C1. The training error ϵtrain (upper panel), the vali-dation error ϵval (middle panel), and the squared norm |w|2
> (lower panel) as functions of the training epoch during several first–stage trainings for the TF 1model (red curves), the TF 26 1
> model (orange curves), the TF 4model (blue curves), the TF 14 4
> model (purple curves) and the FF model (green curves).

and one for its time derivative ˙C(w) = 2 w ˙w = 0 ⇒ wM−1p = 0 (D2) where ˙w stands for the time derivative of the vector w,which we have rewritten in terms of the corresponding momenta p = M ˙w, with M being a fictitious diagonal mass matrix. The interpretation is obvious, that is the momenta must be perpendicular at all times to the hy-persphere norm vector. During the numerical integration of the stochastic equations of motion, the unconstrained pseudo–Langevin update generally produces configurations that do not exactly satisfy this condition. To restore the con-straint, the configuration must be projected back onto the constraint hypersphere of radius √Q. Let’s call (w∗(t + δt ), p∗(t + δt )) the unconstrained update of the current vectors ( w(t), p(t)) through pL, with δt being the integration time step. The integration scheme is then modified as follows, 

w(t + δt ) = w∗(t + δt ) + λ δt 2

2 M−1∇C (w(t)) 

p(t + δt ) = p∗(t + δt )+ + c1δt 

2 [λ∇C (w(t)) + Λ ∇C (w(t + δt ))] (D3) where c1 accounts for the dissipation caused by the vis-cosity of the medium, ∇C(w) = 2 w, and λ, Λ are two 14 

Encoder Type L d m Params [×10 3] ES Epochs ⟨ϵtrain ⟩ ⟨ϵtest ⟩

Transformer 1 26 104 8 × 100k 0.31 ± 0.006 0.40 ± 0.006 Transformer 1 26 104 8 ✓ 10k 0.32 ± 0.006 0.39 ± 0.005 Transformer 1 64 256 44 × 500k 0.02 ± 0.003 0.43 ± 0.004 Transformer 1 64 256 44 ✓ 240 0.35 ± 0.02 0.40 ± 0.008 Transformer 4 14 56 9 × 100k 0.22 ± 0.014 0.36 ± 0.16 Transformer 4 14 56 9 ✓ 2k 0.40 ± 0.012 0.37 ± 0.006 Transformer 4 64 256 169 × 1k 0.00 ± 0.00 0.36 ± 0.005 Transformer 4 64 256 169 ✓ 170 0.22 ± 0.04 0.35 ± 0.016 Feedforward – 64 320 174 × 2k 0.00 ± 0.00 0.50 ± 0.012 Feedforward – 64 320 174 ✓ 170 0.42 ± 0.012 0.46 ± 0.006 TABLE C2. Results of the second-stage trainings for ES ( ✓) and OT ( ×) solutions, with the associated number of training epochs (Epochs) and their average performance on the train and test datasets evaluated through the error function ( ⟨ϵtrain ⟩

and ⟨ϵtest ⟩ respectively). 

Lagrange multipliers which can be computed by impos-ing the validity of Eq. (D1) and Eq. (D2) for w(t + δt )and p(t + δt ) respectively. First we fix the norm of the updated weight vector by solving 

|w(t + δt )|2 − Q = 0 . (D4) This leads to 

λ± = −S1 ± pS21 − S3(S2 − Q)

δt 2S3

, (D5) where we defined 

S1 = w∗(t + δt )M−1w(t)

S2 = |w∗(t + δt )|2

S3 = |M −1w(t)|2

(D6) Among the two roots from Eq. (D5), we select as λ the one with the smallest absolute value, since it corresponds to the minimal correction compatible with the constraint. Once the weight vector has been projected back to the correct hypersphere, we proceed to orthogonalize the mo-menta vector by solving 

w(t + δt )M−1p(t + δt ) = 0 . (D7) Analogously, the solution to this equation is Λ = − S4

c1δt S 5

, (D8) where we introduced 

S4 = w(t + δt )M−1 [p∗(t + δt ) + λc 1δt w(t + δt )] 

S5 = w(t + δt )M−1w(t + δt ). (D9) Lastly, we should mention that a projection is also ap-plied when the initial momentum is generated. Given an unconstrained initial draw p(t0) ∼ N (0 , MT ), we project it onto the tangent space defined by the starting parameters configuration w(t0) by subtracting its normal component 

p(t0) ← p(t0) − w(t0)M−1p(t0)

|w(t0)|2 Mw(t0), (D10) which satisfies Eq. (D2). 15 

Appendix E: Supporting figures 

FIG. E2. The acyl–coenzyme A binding protein contact map. 0   

> 0.5
> 1
> 1.5
> 2
> U T
> (a)
> 0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> train  T
> (b)
> TF 1
> TF 4
> FF
> 0.35
> 0.40
> 0.45
> 0.50
> 0.55
> 0.60
> val  T
> (c)
> ES OT 110
> T/T1/2
> 0.35
> 0.40
> 0.45
> 0.50
> 0.55
> 0.60
> test  T
> (d)

FIG. E3. Right of the line, the average value of the potential energy ⟨U ⟩T (a), of the training error ⟨ϵtrain ⟩T (b), of the validation error ⟨ϵval ⟩T (c), and of the test error ⟨ϵtest ⟩T (d) as functions of the rescaled temperature T /T 1/2 for the TF 1 model (red curves), the TF 4 model (blue curves) and the FF model (green curves). Left of the line, the average of the same observables and for the same models, for early–stopped solutions (ES) and over-trained solutions (OT) obtained with Adam. 16 (a) (b) (c) 

(d) (e) (f) 

(g) (h) (i) 

(j) (k) (l) 

(m) (n) (o) 

FIG. E4. Each panel shows a mean attention matrix, that is symmetrized and averaged over the test set sequences. The top six images are relative to the TF 1 architecture. Images (a), (b) and (c) are the mean attention matrices for an early–stopped vector, an over–trained vector, and a single model sampled at T best . Images (d), (e), (f) are the mean attention matrices for three different models sampled at T = 2 T1/2. The remaining images are relative to the TF 4 architecture. Images (g), (h), (i) are the best–block mean attention matrices for an early–stopped vector, an over–trained vector and a single model sampled at 

T best , respectively. Images (j), (k), (l) are the mean attention matrices of the first, second and fourth blocks of the TF 4 model sampled at T = 1 .1 T1/2. Images (m), (n), (o) are the mean attention matrices of the third block of the TF 4 model for three different models sampled at T = 1 .1 T1/2.17 0

10 

W(QK ) W(VC )

0

10 

> (1) weight
> (1) bias

0

10 

> (2) weight
> (2) bias

0

10 

W(1) b(1) 

0

10 

W(2) b(2) 

0

10 

W(O)

0 0.25 0.5 0.75 1

ql

b(O)

0 0.25 0.5 0.75 1

ql

0

10 

E

TF 1

TF 4

FF 

TF 26 1

TF 14 4

FIG. E5. The distributions ρ of the similarity ql calculated between the weights of each layer. The similarity values are obtained by comparing equilibrated configurations at temperature T best , different for each architecture, i.e. TF 1 (red curves), TF 26 1 (orange curves), TF 4 (blue curves), TF 14 4 (purple curves), and FF (green curves). For the transformer-based models with four modules, in the panels for W (QK ), W (V C ), γ(1) weight , γ(1) bias , γ(2) weight , γ(2) bias , W (1) , b(1) , W (2) and b(2) , the solid lines represent the distribution computed between weights from the first block, whereas the three faded curves are relative to the weights from the second, third and fourth block. 18 0

2

= 1 

0

2

= 1 

0

2

= 2 

0

2

= 2 

0

2

= 3 

0

2

= 3 

1 0 1 2 3

> (1) weight

0

2

= 4 

1 0 1 2 3

> (2) weight

0

1

= 4 

TF 4 TF 14 4

FIG. E6. Distribution ρ of the values of γ(1) weight (left panels) and γ(2) weight (right panels) for the four–block architectures TF 4

(blue curves) and TF 14 4 (purple curves) in the different layers ( l = 1 , 2, 3, 4). The solid lines represent the results obtained through equilibrated simulations at T best separately for each architecture. The dashed red lines represent the distribution of 

γ(1 /2) weight values obtained from the ES solutions for the TF 4 network only. 19 0       

> 0.5
> 1
> P@L
> (a)
> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> P@L 0NT
> (b)
> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> P@L 1NT
> (c)
> TF 1
> TF 4
> TF 26 1
> TF 14 4
> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> P@L 2NT
> (d)
> ES OT 0.5 11.5 22.5 10
> T/T1/2
> 0
> 0.5
> 1
> P@L 3NT
> (e)

FIG. E7. The average and standard deviation of the P@L (a) and of the P@L ∆NT metrics for ∆ = 0 , 1, 2, 3 ((b), (c), (d) and (e) respectively) for ES and OT vectors (left of the line) and for models obtained from sampling at different rescaled temperatures 

T /T 1/2, for each architecture type.