Title: Overcoming unfairness via repeated interactions in mini-ultimatum game

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.03625v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Apr 2026 00:26:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# Overcoming unfairness via repeated interactions in mini-ultimatum game 

Prosanta Mandal, 1, ∗ Arunava Patra, 1, † and Sagar Chakraborty 1, ‡

> 1

Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh 208016, India 

Repeated interactions are ubiquitous and known to promote social behaviour. While research often focuses on cooperation in the Prisoner’s Dilemma, experimental evidence suggests repeated interactions also foster fairness. This study addresses a gap in the literature by theoretically mod-elling the evolution of fairness within a repeated mini-ultimatum game. Specifically, we construct a repeated-game framework where offerers and accepters interact using reactive strategies. We then investigate whether fair reactive strategy pairs are resilient against unfair mutants in a two-species population. By analyzing short-term evolutionary stability via the concept of two-species evolutionary stable strategy, we identify a critical effective game length: below this value, fairness is promoted by offerers and accepters who comply with their partner’s past actions. Above this critical value, fairness is maintained by ‘complier’ offerers and fair accepters. We also show that specific reactive strategies effectively facilitate the emergence and sustenance of fairness in long-term mutation-selection dynamics. To this end, we develop a two-population stochastic dynamics model—a generalization of classical adaptive dynamics—that accounts for finite population sizes and non-local mutants in the reactive strategy space. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Individuals often distribute desirable resources in ways that favour their own interests, indicating that un-fairness is expected to evolve under Darwinian selec-tion [1]. However, it is well documented by a substan-tial body of experimental and empirical research on both humans and non-human species that fair treatment is not confined to humans, and that animals also exhibit fair behaviour [2–8]. A classic experiment on stickle-backs showed that sticklebacks distributed themselves between feeding patches in proportion to food availabil-ity, thereby equalizing the rewards among individuals across patches [2]. Experiments on chimpanzees, brown capuchin monkeys, and domestic dogs also highlight the presence of fair behaviour in animals [3–5]. Furthermore, empirical evidences document a sense of fairness in coy-otes and ravens [6–8]. Explaining how fairness emerges constitutes an impor-tant area of research across disciplines ranging from the social sciences to the biological sciences [9–11]. Under-standing its evolutionary roots can contribute to the de-velopment of social justice [12], equitable treatment [13], and fair resource allocation among individuals [14]. In this regard, evolutionary game theory offers a powerful framework for studying how collective outcomes emerge from individual-level interactions [15–17]. A well-known paradigm for modelling fair behaviour within this frame-work is the ultimatum game (UG) [18–21]. In the classical UG, two players must divide a fixed desirable (say, money or food), normalized to one unit, which is initially allocated to one of them, referred to as the offerer. The offerer offers a portion of this amount to    

> ∗prosantam21@iitk.ac.in
> †arunava20@iitk.ac.in (corresponding author)
> ‡sagarc@iitk.ac.in

the other player, the accepter, who then either accepts or rejects the offer. Acceptance results in the proposed di-vision being implemented, whereas rejection leaves both players with nothing. In principle, the offerer may of-fer any amount between 0 and 1, and the accepter may ask for any minimum amount within the same range for acceptance. A rational offerer should offer the small-est possible positive amount, while a rational accepter should accept any non-zero offer, since receiving some-thing is preferable to receiving nothing. This outcome constitutes the subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium under the assumption of common knowledge of the game com-ponents [22]. Although the UG has received considerable attention in both theoretical and experimental economics since its introduction [23–26], it may be equally relevant for de-scribing biologically realistic scenarios such as food shar-ing in cooperative hunting and alliance formation within groups. For instance, individuals may negotiate the divi-sion of rewards before engaging in joint hunting. In such a case, one dominant individual within the group may determine the division of rewards, while the others may then choose to accept or reject it. In recent years, considerable research has been devoted to identifying the critical factors that promote fairness in the UG. Reputation-based models demonstrate that rep-utation updating helps individuals select their interaction partners and prevents proposers from making selfish of-fers, thereby promoting fair behaviour [11, 18, 27, 28]. Extensive studies of the UG in spatial settings have es-tablished network reciprocity as an essential factor for sustaining fairness [29–31]. In addition, unfairness can be mitigated by randomly alternating the roles of of-ferer and accepter [32]. Other notable factors that have been shown to foster fairness include variation in stake size [33, 34], learning [35], rare mutation processes, and finite population size [36]. Physiological factors such as empathy and emotion have also been studied in the con-text of the UG and have been found to facilitate the 

> arXiv:2604.03625v1 [nlin.AO] 4 Apr 2026

2evolution of fairness [37, 38]. Organisms often encounter the same partners multi-ple times over their lifetime. However, to the best of our knowledge, almost all prior models of the UG have focused on one time interactions and have therefore over-looked the role of repeated encounters between offerers and accepters. Such repeated interactions can take differ-ent forms. An offerer may face the same responder over several rounds and accumulate rewards over the course of these interactions, creating an opportunity for the ac-cepter to reject low offers initially in anticipation of more favourable offers later. Alternatively, the roles of offerer and accepter may alternate across rounds, allowing both individuals to participate in determining the division of the resource. An experiment on the UG in which players interact repeatedly with the same opponent shows that repeated interaction can promote fairness in the population [39]. Since the conflict between the offerer and the accepter becomes more pronounced under repeated interaction, it may push the offerer to behave more fairly. Note that repeated-game frameworks are well established in the lit-erature, but they have primarily focused on the prisoner’s dilemma as the underlying game for explaining the evolu-tion of cooperation [40, 41]. A repeated-game framework in the context of the UG remains relatively unexplored, even though such a framework may be particularly useful for investigating history-dependent decision-making and learning through repeated observation in the evolution of fairness. Therefore, we attempt to establish a repeated UG framework in which players interact with the same part-ner multiple times, where the offerer responds only to the accepter’s most recent demand and the accepter likewise makes demands solely on the basis of the last offer. All this happens under the shadow of the future [42] that determines the probability that a subsequent round will occur. We then ask whether a fair strategy pair can resist invasion by an unfair mutant pair in a two-species popu-lation of offerers and accepters. In this context, we seek to understand how the shadow of the future influences the evolutionary stability of fair strategy pairs. We investigate this question under two different evo-lutionary processes. Short-term evolution, which typi-cally refers to the replication-selection process, governs changes in trait frequencies for a fixed set of traits in the population [43–45]. However, even if a fair strategy pair is evolutionarily stable in the short term, its emergence in the long-term evolutionary process is not guaranteed. We, therefore, also investigate long-term evolution, which is typically a mutation-selection process [46, 47]. Under this process, a rare mutation appears at each time step in the population and either fixates, thereby resulting in a new monomorphic state, or goes extinct. In this way, the process drives the evolution across different monomor-phic population states. The fixation probability of a rare mutant is determined by the replication-selection pro-cess. The transient phase from the arrival of a rare mu-tant to its eventual fixation or extinction is referred to as short-term evolution. We present the framework of the two-player repeated mini-UG in Section II. Subsequently, we present the short-term evolutionary stability of fair strategy pairs against mutants with unfair strategy pairs in Section III. The framework of long-term evolution in a two-species population and its analysis are presented in Section IV. Our results show that fair reactive strategy pairs resist invasion by unfair mutant pairs, and that a critical value of the shadow of the future determines the performance of fair strategies in both the short and long term. The long-term fairness rate remains high below this critical value. We discuss this contextually in Section V to con-clude the paper.  

> II. REPEATED 2-PLAYER MINI-UG

We consider that two players repeatedly interact with each other to distribute a desirable and the repeated in-teraction occurs in a simultaneous fashion, where both the offerer and the accepter act simultaneously. Further-more, we assume that both the offerer and the accepter adopt reactive strategies—acting based on the oppo-nent’s last move—when playing the repeated game. Since the number of possible offers and demands—regarded as the actions of the offerer and the accepter, respectively— is uncountably infinite, defining reactive strategies would require uncountably many parameters. Therefore, to simplify the analysis without losing non-trivial essense of the game, we focus on a simplified version of the UG, known as the mini-ultimatum game [35], and consider it as the underlying game of the repeated interaction. In the mini-UG, the offerer can offer either high or low, and the accepter also has two available actions: demand-ing either high or low. We represent the actions high and low of the offerer (or accepter) by H and L, respectively, while the corresponding amounts of offer (or demand) are denoted by h and l. This distinction separates the no-tation for actions from that for the amounts of offers or demands. It is usually considered that the high amount of offer or demand, h, corresponds to the equal split 0.5,since offering more or less than 0.5 is unfair. The same is true for the accepter: demanding more or less than an equal amount is unfair. The low amount l corresponds to a very small fraction of the desirable amount, close to 

0, and thus l and h satisfy the condition 0 < l < h = 0 .5.The payoffs of both the offerer and the accepter are determined by the parameters l and h. When the of-ferer adopts action H and the accepter takes action L, an agreement is successfully reached so that the offerer receives the payoff 1 − h while the accepter receives the payoff h. In contrast, when the offerer adopts action L and the accepter chooses action H, no deal occurs lead-ing to both players receiving zero payoff. This action pair of the offerer and the accepter, (L, H), is referred to as 

spiteful behaviour. If both the offerer and the accepter 3Round Offerer Accepter :: H H LLPayoff Strategy : H HL LStrategy Payoff :1 2 3 4:                   

> FIG. 1. Schematic diagram illustrating the repeated interaction between an offerer and an accepter employing reactive strategies. The pure reactive strategies of the offerer and the accepter are tabulated where (pv, q v, y v)represents the reactive strategy of the offerer and the accepter if the corresponding subscript vis taken to be oand a, respectively. The offerer and the accepter are shown to use the reactive strategies C oand A a, respectively. Consequently, in the first round, the offerer makes a high offer (H) and the accepter chooses a high demand (H). Therefore, the offerer and the accepter receive payoffs o1= 1 −hand a1=h,respectively, in the first round. In the second round, the offerer complies with the accepter’s previous demand and chooses H, while the accepter anti-complies with the offerer’s previous offer and chooses L. In subsequent rounds, the offerer continues to comply with the accepter’s immediate past demand, whereas the accepter anti-complies with the offerer’s immediate past offer.

choose action H, then the offerer receives the payoff 1 − h

while the accepter receives h, as the deal takes place. The pair (H, H) corresponds to fair behaviour, since the offerer and the accepter are both fair in their offer and demand, respectively. The other possible choice for both the offerer and the accepter is L. In this case, the offerer receives 1 − l while the accepter receives the remaining amount l. This pair of actions, viz., (L,L), leads to an unequal split between them and is therefore associated with unfair behaviour. Thus, the strategic interaction between the offerer and the accepter can be modelled through the following bi-matrix game: Accepter Offerer H LH 1 − h, h 1 − h, h 

L 0, 0 1 − l, l . (1)  

> A. Reactive strategy in mini-UG

Since the players interact repeatedly by employing re-active strategies, we introduce the notion of reactive strategy in the context of the mini-UG. A reactive strat-egy is characterized by two conditional probability pa-rameters and one unconditional probability parameter. We denote the reactive strategy of the offerer as So =(po, q o, y o), where po and qo represent the conditional probabilities of playing the action H given that the ac-cepter played H and L in the most recent round, respec-tively. The parameter yo represents the unconditional probability of choosing the high offer H in the initial round. Likewise, we denote the reactive strategy of the accepter as Sa = ( pa, q a, y a), where pa and qa represent the conditional probabilities of playing the action H given that the offerer played H and L in the previous round, re-spectively. The parameter ya denotes the unconditional probability of choosing the high demand H in the initial round. The strategies are called pure reactive strategies if 

pv , q v ∈ { 0, 1}, where v ∈ { o, a }. Note that po and qo con-stitute the reactive strategy space for the offerer, while pa

and qa form the reactive strategy space for the accepter. The corners of the reactive strategy space correspond to the pure reactive strategies. By adopting the pure reac-tive strategy (0 , 0) , an offerer (or accepter) chooses the action L in every round. We term this the unfair strategy 

and denote it by U o and U a for the offerer and the ac-cepter, respectively. In contrast, an offerer (or accepter) chooses the action H in every round when the strategy is 

(1 , 1) . We call this the fair strategy and denote it by F o

and F a for the offerer and the accepter, respectively. In addition to these, an offerer using the strategy (1 , 0) com-plies with the accepter’s immediate past demand, while an accepter adopting the strategy (1 , 0) complies with the offerer’s immediate past offer. Therefore, it is rea-sonable to term this strategy the complier strategy , and we denote the complier strategies of the offerer and the accepter by C o and C a, respectively. In a similar fash-ion, we also define an anti-complier strategy represented by (0 , 1) . Under this strategy, an offerer defies the ac-cepter and an accepter defies the offerer in every round. We denote this strategy by A o and A a for the offerer and the accepter, respectively. As far as the actions in the initial round required for a complete description of these pure strategies are con-cerned, they need to be fixed. Clearly, the fair offerer and the fair accepter start with H, while the unfair offerer and the unfair accepter start with the action L. We assume that both the complier and anti-complier strategies play H in the initial round. In summary, we tabulate the pure reactive strategies of the offerer and the accepter and il-lustrate a repeated interaction between the offerer and the accepter in Fig. 1. 4 

> B. Payoff

While the offerer and the accepter interact repeatedly, they receive an average payoff at the end of the repeated interaction. However, realistically, the players are always under the shadow of the future, i.e., the anticipation of future interactions drives current cooperation. How long the “shadow” is depends on how high the probability of future interaction is. This notion is traditionally incor-porated by considering repeated game with discounting :the payoffs are discounted by a discount factor δ ∈ (0 , 1) 

interpreted as the probability that the next round occurs. For example, the probability that the n-th round occurs is given by δn−1.At the end of the repeated interaction, the offerer and the accepter receive accumulated payoffs, which are av-eraged over the expected number of rounds (also known as the effective game length) to determine their average payoffs. The expected number of rounds in a repeated game with discount factor δ is P∞ 

> n=1

δn−1 = 11−δ . Thus, the expected payoffs of the offerer and the accepter are, respectively, given by 

πo(So, S a) = (1 − δ)

> ∞

X

> n=1

onδn−1, (2a) 

πa(So, S a) = (1 − δ)

> ∞

X

> n=1

anδn−1, (2b) where on and an are the payoffs of the offerer and the accepter in the n-th round, given by on ∈ { 1 − h, 0, 1 − l}

and an ∈ { h, 0, l }. The analytical derivation of these expected payoffs is provided in Appendix A.  

> III. SHORT-TERM EVOLUTION

We now proceed to address the evolution of fairness in the regime of short-term evolution. Specifically, we investigate whether, in a heterogeneous population con-sisting of a fair offerer and accepter subpopulations, an infinitesimal fraction of unfair mutants can outperform the fair heterogeneous population.  

> A. Set-up

We consider a well-mixed heterogeneous population consisting of two infinitely large subpopulations charac-terized by offerers and accepters. The offerer subpopu-lation consists of reactive fair and unfair offerers, while the accepter subpopulation consists of reactive fair and unfair accepters. Thus, a reactive fair or unfair offerer can interact with a reactive fair or unfair accepter in the accepter subpopulation, whereas a reactive fair or unfair accepter can interact with a reactive fair or unfair of-ferer in the offerer subpopulation. Hence, the strategic interaction between fair reactive residents and unfair re-active mutants can be mathematically represented by a bi-matrix game. Suppose the resident population state is given by 

(So, S a) and the mutant state by ( ˜So, ˜Sa). Then, the strategic interaction between the offerer and the accepter can be described by the following repeated-game payoff matrices: 

O =

πo(So, S a) πo(So, ˜Sa)

πo( ˜So, S a) πo( ˜So, ˜Sa)



(3a) and A =

πa(So, S a) πa( ˜So, S a)

πa(So, ˜Sa) πa( ˜So, ˜Sa)



, (3b) where the payoff elements are obtained from Eqs. 2a and 2b. It is worth noting that the pairs of reactive strategies of the offerer and the accepter leading to fairness in the population are (Fo, Fa), (Fo, Ca), (Co, Fa), and (Co, Ca).This is because adopting any of these strategies leads to the action pair (H, H) being played in every round of the repeated interaction. In contrast, the pairs of reactive strategies that lead to unfairness in the population are 

(Uo, Ua) and (Uo, Ca), since these strategies result in the action pair (L, L) being played in every round of the repeated game. Next, we construct a bi-matrix game for each combina-tion of fair resident strategy pair and unfair mutant strat-egy pair, and then determine the two-species evolution-ary stable strategy (2ESS) [48–51]. Let x = {xSo , x ˜So }

represent the strategy of an offerer in the offerer sub-population, where xSo and x ˜So are the probabilities of adopting the types So and ˜So, respectively. Likewise, 

y = {ySa , y ˜Sa } denotes the strategy of an accepter in the accepter subpopulation, where ySa and y ˜Sa are the prob-abilities of being of types Sa and ˜Sa, respectively. Then, 

(x, y) refers to an arbitrary (mixed) strategy pair in the two-species population. A strategy pair (ˆx, ˆy) is a 2ESS if and only if either ˆx · Oy > x · Oy or ˆy · Ax > y · Ax (4) for every strategy pair (x, y) that is sufficiently close to, but not equal to (ˆx, ˆy).This definition of 2ESS is general and not confined to reactive strategies. In principle, one could this ask whether a strategy is 2ESS in any bimatrix game. For example, one can check that the unfairness (L, L) is a 2ESS whereas the fairness (H, H) is not a 2ESS in the underlying game Eq. 1. This implies that, in the absence of any repeated interaction, unfairness should evolve—a fact which is obviously inconsistent with empirically ob-served fairness all around us. Thus, as a central theme of this paper we are curious whether repeated interac-tions can overcome unfairness by enabling fair reactive strategies to become 2ESS against unfair mutants. It may be pointed out that the implicit replication-selection process in infinite well-mixed population is tra-ditionally modelled as replicator dynamics [52, 53]. But 5since 2ESS is proven [50, 51] to be asymptotically stable state of bimatrix game under this short-term dynamics, we need not explicitly deal with the dynamics; direct knowledge of the 2ESS is enough to conclude what the dynamics would anyway give in the long run.  

> B. Results

We present our results using 2ESS phase diagrams, which illustrate the outcomes of the evolutionary stability analysis via distinct colour codes. To construct the 2ESS phase diagram, we separately derive a bi-matrix game for each combination of fair and unfair repeated-game strategies and then determine the 2ESS from the corre-sponding payoff matrices using the condition in Eq. 4. Since there are four fair strategies and two unfair strate-gies, we construct a total of eight bi-matrix games to obtain the 2ESS phase diagrams shown in Fig. 2. (a) (b) (c) (d)                       

> FIG. 2. Evolutionary stability of fairness in repeated mini-UG: Here we showcase 2ESS phase diagrams of fair strategy pairs [ (Fo,Fa),(Fo,Ca),(Co,Fa), and (Co,Ca)] versus un-fair strategy pairs [ (Uo,Ua)and (Uo,Ca)] in an infinite two-species population. Subplots (a) and (c) represent the evo-lutionary stability of fair strategies against the unfair strat-egy pair (Uo,Ua). Subplots (b) and (d) show the evolution-ary stability of fair strategies against the unfair strategy pair
> (Uo,Ca). The upper and lower panels correspond to the dis-count factor ranges 0< δ < δ cand δc< δ < 1, respec-tively. The olive colour indicates that both the fair and unfair strategies are 2ESSes against each other, whereas the light red colour indicates that only the unfair strategy is 2ESS. The no colour (or white) boxes represent the absence of any 2ESS.

We find that fair reactive strategies can prevent in-vasion by unfair reactive mutants. However, the ability of fair strategy pairs to resist invasion of unfair mutants depends on the discount factor. In particular, we iden-tify a critical discount factor, δc, which is determined by the values of high offer (or demand) and low offer (or demand). The critical value is given by δc = 1−h 

> 1−l

. Be-low the critical discount factor δc, two fair strategy pairs 

(Co, Ca) and (Co, Fa) are 2ESSes against the unfair strat-egy pair (Uo, Ua). In contrast, for 1 > δ > δ c, only the fair strategy pair (Co, Fa) remains evolutionarily stable against invasion by (Uo, Ua). It can be seen by compar-ing Fig. 2(a) and Fig. 2(c). The strategy pair (Co, Fa) is also evolutionarily stable at the critical discount factor 

δ = δc. It is worth mentioning that, at δ = δc, the ESS phase diagram against (Uo, Ua) coincides with Fig. 2(c), while the ESS phase diagram against (Uo, Ca) matches Fig. 2(b). The performance of fair reactive strategies also de-pends on the nature of the unfair reactive mutants. Aresident two-species population adopting the fair strat-egy pair (Co, Fa) can resist invasion by the unfair mu-tant (Uo, Ua). In contrast, the same resident population cannot prevent invasion by the unfair mutant (Uo, Ca);compare Fig. 2(c) and Fig. 2(d). A similar observation holds for resident population adopting the fair strategy 

(Co, Ca), irrespective of the value of the discount factor. It is important to note that the unfair strategy (Uo, Ca)

is not a 2ESS against all possible fair mutants, and the fair mutants are also not 2ESS against the unfair strategy 

(Uo, Ca) for δ < δ c [see Fig. 2(b)]. This result also holds at δ = δc. Consequently, no 2ESS exists in the population when the discount factor lies in the range 0 < δ ≤ δc.However, when the discount factor exceeds the critical value ( δ > δ c), the unfair strategy regains evolutionary stability against the fair mutants (Co, Fa) and (Fo, Fa).In summary, we find two important results: the complier strategy pair (Co, Ca) is evolutionarily stable against (Uo, Ua) only when the effective game length is sufficiently short, whereas (Co, Fa) outperforms the mu-tant pair (Uo, Ua) regardless of the effective game length. We next provide an intuitive explanation of these results. The evolutionary stability of (Co, Ca) against (Uo, Ua)

can be understood as follows. The complier accepter be-gins with a high demand, thereby punishing the unfair offerer while reaching agreement with the complier of-ferer in the initial round. However, by complying with the unfair offerer in subsequent rounds, it lowers its own rewards and allows the unfair offerer to increase its pay-off. As a result, over long repeated interactions, the un-fair offerer gradually derives a fitness advantage from the complier accepter’s compliance. Meanwhile, the complier offerer accepts the complier accepter’s high demand from the outset and therefore earns less than the unfair offerer in future rounds, although the complier accepter obtains higher rewards than the unfair accepter against the com-plier offerer. Consequently, beyond a critical value of the shadow of the future, the fitness of the complier strategy pair is such that it can no longer resist invasion by the unfair strategy pair. Likewise, the survival of the strategy pair (Co, Fa)

against (Uo, Ua) regardless of the effective game length 6can be explained as follows. In this pair, the accepter acts as a tough accepter by always demanding high. When an infinitesimal fraction of unfair mutants appears, the tough accepter punishes the unfair offerer by rejecting the unfair offer in every round, thereby reducing its fit-ness. At the same time, it reaches an agreement with the complier offerer in every round, enabling the latter to resist invasion by the unfair offerer. In addition, the fair accepter extracts higher rewards from the complier offerer than the unfair accepter does. As a result, the strategy pair (Co, Fa) resists invasion by unfair mutants.  

> IV. LONG-TERM EVOLUTION

Although, we have established that fairness emerges and persists through repeated interactions in the short term under the replication–selection process, the long-term evolution of fairness under the mutation-selection regime, however, remains to be investigated. In what follows, we examine whether the reactive strategies that promote the emergence of fairness can persist in the long-term mutation-selection process.  

> A. Set-up

To this end, we consider a finite, well-mixed heteroge-neous population consisting of offerer and accepter sub-populations of sizes No and Na, respectively. At any time step, all offerers make the same offer and all ac-cepters demand the same amount; thus, each subpopula-tion is monomorphic. The initial state of the population is taken to be (Uo, Ua), with unfair offerers and unfair accepters, since our primary interest lies in the evolution of fairness. The emergence of fairness requires mutations in this unfair population, and evolutionary systems typ-ically undergo rare mutation processes. Accordingly, we introduce a single mutant at each time step. Here, a rare mutation implies that a new mutant does not arise un-til the fixation or extinction of the previous mutant is complete. In a heterogeneous population, mutants can appear in either or both subpopulations. If mutants emerge in both subpopulations, this can lead to three possible scenarios: the extinction of mutants from both subpopulations, the fixation of mutants in both subpopulations, or the fixa-tion of a mutant in either subpopulation. The latter two scenarios give rise to three new population states. For instance, if a mutant pair denoted by ( ˜So, ˜Sa) arises in a resident population state characterized by (So, S a), then it can result in three new population states: ( ˜So, ˜Sa),

( ˜So, S a), and (So, ˜Sa). Therefore, mutations in both sub-populations lead to transitions of the resident population state to any of these three population states. If a mu-tant emerges in only one subpopulation, then it gives rise to only one new population state, as the mutant can either fixate or go extinct in that subpopulation while the other subpopulation remains unchanged. For exam-ple, when the mutant pair ( ˜So, S a) occurs in the resi-dent population (So, S a), it leads to one new population state ( ˜So, S a). Note that, for convenience, we have used the term ‘mutant pair’ even when mutant appears in one subpopulation. Here, a mutant in each subpopulation is an individ-ual adopting a new strategy, and mutants arise succes-sively. Once the fixation or extinction of the previous pair of mutants in both subpopulations is complete, an-other random pair of mutants emerges in the next time step and either takes over the respective subpopulations or goes extinct. In this way, the mutation–selection pro-cess recurs indefinitely. During its transient phase, the resident and mutant compete through the replication– selection process, and the strength of selection is quan-tified by the parameter w. It takes values from zero to infinity, and random drift dominates when its value is close to zero. Increasing its value increases the weight of payoff in fitness. Eventually, the selection strength and payoff determine the probability of fixation of the mutant pair. This probability is quantified by the fixation prob-ability, and its formulation employing the replication– selection process is discussed in Appendix C. Note that each subpopulation becomes monomorphic after the fix-ation or extinction of a mutant is complete, and the two subpopulations transition from one monomorphic state to another on a long evolutionary time scale. Let us denote the strategy set of the offerer by So =

{Fo, Ao, Co, Uo} and and that of the accepter by Sa =

{Fa, Aa, Ca, Ua}, from which mutants for the offerer and the accepter subpopulations are randomly drawn, respec-tively. The mutation rates in the offerer and the accepter subpopulations are denoted by μo and μa, respectively. Clearly, there are 16 possible population states, since a population state is characterized by a pair of strategies of the two subpopulations, (So, S a), where So ∈ S o and 

Sa ∈ S a.Now, let us define the fairness rate corresponding to 

(So, S a) by γ(So, S a), which measures the frequency of the action pair (H, H) when an offerer with strategy So

and an accepter with strategy Sa play repeated games. As the population evolves among these 16 states, the fairness rate varies over time. If we let α(t)(So,S a) denote the frequency of the monomorphic population state with strategy pair (So, S a) at time t in the mutation–selection process, then the average fairness level in the population at time t is given by 

⟨γ(t)⟩ = X

> So∈S o
> Sa∈S a

α(t)(So,S a) γ(So, S a). (5) The detailed expression for the fairness rate γ(So, S a) is provided in Appendix A, and the analytical derivation of α(t)(So,S a) from the mutation–selection process in a two-species population is presented in Appendix B. 7Fairness level (a) (b) (c)                        

> FIG. 3. Emergence of fairness via repeated interactions in mutation-selection regime. The long-term fairness level is shown across the parameter space of population size and discount factor for three different selection strengths, w∈{0.1,0.5,1.0}.The population sizes and discount factor are varied within the ranges No=Na∈[2 ,100] and δ∈
> [0 .03 ,0.99] , respectively. The color bar represents the aver-age fairness rate in the population. As the color gradient transitions from light to dark, the level of fairness increases.
> B. Results

To analyze the long-term evolutionary dynamics, we assume, without loss of generality, that the two sub-populations have equal sizes, thereby reducing the num-ber of parameters. Furthermore, we fix the high offer or demand at h = 0 .5, as offering or demanding more or less than an equal proportion is considered unfair. The low offer or demand is set to l = 0 .05 . The mu-tation rates in both subpopulations are assumed to be equal; in particular, we set μo = μa = 10 −2. We then present the long-term fairness level across popu-lation sizes No = Na ∈ [2 , 100] and discount factors 

δ ∈ [0 .03 , 0.99] for three different selection strengths, 

w ∈ { 0.1, 0.5, 1.0}, as shown in Fig. 3. To exclusively understand the emergence of fairness, we initialize both the offerer and the accepter subpop-ulations with unfair individuals, i.e., the initial popula-tion state is taken to be (Uo, Ua), and we let the system evolve. After 10 5 generations, we record the distribution of population states and compute the average fairness rate using Eq. 5. We perform this analysis for each com-bination of discount factor and population size to gener-ate the plots in Fig. 3. We observe that, for selection strength w = 0 .1, the color gradient remains nearly uniform across population sizes and discount factors. Thus, the fairness level does not depend significantly on either the discount factor or the population size under weak selection, since random drift influences individual fitness more strongly than the payoff obtained from game interactions. As the selection strength increases to w = 0 .5, the fairness level begins to vary across population sizes and discount factors [see Fig. 3(b)], as the payoff from game interactions starts to dominate over random drift. It may be noted that the fairness level decreases as the population size increases, and this holds for both low and high discount factors. Increasing the population size reduces stochastic fluctuations, and the unfair strat-egy (Uo, Ua) is always 2ESS against fair reactive strategy pairs in an infinite population, leading to a decline in the fairness level. The variation in the fairness level becomes more conspicuous as the selection strength increases fur-ther [see Fig. 3(c)], since selection is largely driven by the payoff from game interactions. For stronger selec-tion ( w = 0 .5, 1.0), we also observe that the fairness level decreases with increasing discount factor. Moreover, for large population sizes, there is a sudden shift in the fair-ness level beyond a particular value of the discount factor. Notably, this value coincides with the critical discount factor δc = 1−h 

> 1−l

identified in the short-term evolution. To better understand this, we select two representa-tive points from Fig. 3(c). One point corresponds to a discount factor δ = 0 .3, which lies below the critical value δc, while the other corresponds to δ = 0 .9, which lies above δc. Both the points are chosen for the same population size, No = Na = 50 . For these two parameter sets, we illustrate the evolution of fairness and the cor-responding stationary distributions of population states in Fig. 4. Fig. 4(a) shows the fairness level over time, whereas Figs. 4(b) and 4(c) display the distribution of population states after 10 5 generations for discount fac-tors δ = 0 .3 and δ = 0 .9, respectively. As shown in Fig. 4(b), the fair strategy pairs (Co, Ca)

and (Co, Fa) are predominant in the population when the discount factor is δ = 0 .3. In contrast, when the discount factor increases to δ = 0 .9, the frequency of the popula-tion state (Co, Ca) approaches zero; see Fig. 4(c). This difference can be understood from the short-term evolu-tionary stability analysis. When the discount factor lies below the critical value δc, the strategy pairs (Co, Ca) and 

(Co, Fa) are 2ESS against the unfair mutant (Uo, Ua) [see Fig. 2(a)]. Consequently, a resident population adopting 

(Co, Ca) or (Co, Fa) hinders the fixation of unfair mu-tants in the mutation–selection process, allowing both strategies to persist in the long term. In contrast, for the higher discount factor δ = 0 .9, (Co, Fa) remains 2ESS, whereas (Co, Ca) loses its evolutionary stability once the discount factor exceeds δc [see Fig. 2(a) and Fig. 2(c)]. As a result, a resident population with strategy pair (Co, Ca)

is unable to resist the fixation of unfair mutants, thereby reducing its prevalence in the long term and causing it to approach zero. In passing, it is interesting to note that the unfair strategy (Uo, Ca) emerges in the long-term evolution for a high discount factor δ = 0 .9, since it becomes 2ESS against fair mutants in the short-term evolution when the discount factor exceeds the critical value δc [see Fig. 2(b) and Fig. 2(d)]. Summing up, the long-term fairness level is relatively higher in repeated interactions with a short effective game length, and it is predominantly driven by strategy pairs that include the complier offerer and either a com-plier accepter or a tough accepter. For repeated games with a high effective game length, the two unfair states become more frequent in the population, which leads to a decline in the overall fairness level [Fig. 4(a)]. In this case, the complier offerer and the fair accepter predomi-nantly drive the long-term fairness. Thus, the long-term 8(c) (b) Time ( ) Frequency Population states Frequency Population states (a)               

> FIG. 4. The long-term fairness level increases as discount factor decreases. The fairness level and the frequencies of reactive strategy pairs in long-term are illustrated for two discount factors, δ= 0 .3and δ= 0 .9. Subplot (a) shows the fairness level in the population over time, where the dotted and solid lines represent the fairness levels for δ= 0 .3and δ= 0 .9, respectively. Subplots (b) and (c) depict the distribution of strategy pairs after 10 5generations. The light red color denotes the unfair strategy pairs, whereas the sea green color represents the fair strategy pairs. The gray color corresponds to the remaining strategy pairs.

results are consistent with the short-term outcomes.  

> V. DISCUSSION

We have developed a repeated-game framework in the context of the ultimatum game to examine the evolution of fairness. In particular, we consider the mini-UG, in which the offerer offers and the accepter demands either a high amount, corresponding to half of the desirable amount, or a low amount, corresponding to a proportion close to zero. This reduction keeps the repeated-game framework simple while preserving the essential features of the problem. It is further assumed that offerers and accepters adopt reactive strategies in the repeated inter-action: the offerer’s offer depends solely on the accepter’s latest demand, while the accepter’s demand depends on the offerer’s most recent offer. Having identified the reactive strategy pairs capable of sustaining fairness, we then investigated their short-term evolutionary stability against infinitesimal unfair reactive mutants in a well-mixed infinite two-species population of offerers and accepters. However, such short-term evo-lutionary stability does not necessarily ensure their per-sistence in the long term. For completeness, we therefore examined the evolution of fair reactive strategies in the long-term mutation–selection process. The fair strategy pair in which the offerer complies with the accepter’s demand and the accepter complies with the offerer’s offer is a 2ESS against unfair reactive mutants and promotes fairness. Notably, we identify a critical discount factor below which the complier strat-egy is a 2ESS. This critical value depends on the val-ues of high and low offers or demands. In contrast, the strategy pair consisting of a complier offerer and a tough accepter—who demands a fair proportion—fosters fair-ness even for high discount factors, as it remains a 2ESS against unfair reactive mutants irrespective of the dis-count factor. These two fair reactive strategy pairs also predominantly drive the evolution of fairness in the long term. In particular, for large population sizes, we observe a conspicuous shift in the long-term fairness level around the critical discount factor. In conclusion, repeated in-teractions with a small effective game length facilitate the emergence of fairness in both short- and long-term evolutions. An experimental study [39] on repeated interactions in the UG reports that fair behaviour is driven by tough ac-cepters who reject many fair offers to build a tough repu-tation for extracting a large proportion of the share when offerers offer any amount from zero to one. Our analy-sis reveals similar fact: Both short-term and long-term fairness are predominantly driven by the fair accepter— which may be seen analogous to a tough accepter in our setup—and the complier offerer in long repeated inter-actions. Notably, the analytical framework developed to study the mutation–selection process in a two-species population may facilitate future investigations of emer-gent behaviour in heterogeneous populations. Our results are not analogous to, but instead differ subtly from, ex-isting findings on cooperation in repeated-game settings. In particular, while a large effective game length is typ-ically required for reciprocal strategies to become evo-lutionarily stable and sustain cooperation [40], a small effective game length is sufficient for the complier strat-egy to evolve and foster fairness. Our model has several limitations that also open av-enues for future research. Asynchronous interactions are common in nature, where helping others and receiving help may occur at different time steps. Moreover, in the standard UG, the accepter’s action naturally follows the offerer’s move. In contrast, our model assumes that the offerer and the accepter act simultaneously in each round. In addition, organisms with higher cognitive abilities may engage in repeated interactions using more sophisticated Markovian strategies. Incorporating alternating interac-tions and complex Markovian strategies into our frame-work [54–57] may therefore capture more realistic social 9interactions. Furthermore, when individuals repeatedly interact with their partners, their behaviour is likely to evolve through observation and learning. Experimental studies confirm that learning can help to overcome unfair be-haviour [58]. A systematic investigation of different kinds of learning rules within our framework remains an im-portant direction for future research [59–62]. Moreover, it would be worthwhile to examine scenarios in which in-dividuals occasionally make mistakes in choosing actions or in observing others’ behaviour, particularly in noisy environments [63–66]. We conclude with the hope that our work will serve as a catalyst for more experiments to research on repeated interaction driven emergence and sustenance of fairness. 

> DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

All the relevant numerical codes used to gener-ate the results of this paper are publicly avail-able on GitHub: https://github.com/ArunavaHub/ RepeatedFairness.git .

> ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

University Grant Commission (India) is acknowledged for awarding a Senior Research Fellowship to PM. AP acknowledges the support from the Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur in the form of FARE Fellowship. 

> Appendix A: Analytical derivation of the payoff and fairness rate

The expected payoffs in Eq. 2a and Eq. 2b can be de-rived analytically by modelling the repeated interaction as a Markov chain over a finite set of states defined by action pairs—notationally, ω = ( so, s a)—of the offerer and the accepter, viz., (H, H), (H, L), (L, H), and (L, L).Let ω = ( so, s a) and ω′ = ( s′

> o

, s ′

> a

) denote two consecutive outcomes. Then, the transition probability from ω to ω′

is given by the following elements of transition matrix [say, M(So, S a)] of the Markov chain: 

mω,ω ′ = zo · za (A1) where probabilities zo and za, respectively, are 

zo =



po if s′ 

> o

= H and sa = H,

1 − po if s′ 

> o

= L and sa = H,qo if s′ 

> o

= H and sa = L,

1 − qo if s′ 

> o

= L and sa = L;

(A2a) 

za =



pa if s′ 

> a

= H and so = H,

1 − pa if s′ 

> a

= L and so = H,qa if s′ 

> a

= H and so = L,

1 − qa if s′ 

> a

= L and so = L.

(A2b) Let σ(0) denote the initial state vector, where each element σ(0)  

> sosa

represents the probability that the initial actions of the offerer and the accepter are so and sa,respectively. The weighted average state vector is then given by [67] 

¯σ =

P∞ 

> n=1

σ(0) (δM)n−1

P∞ 

> n=1

δn−1 = (1 − δ)σ(0) (I − δM)−1, (A3) where I is the 4 × 4 identity matrix. The element ¯σsosa

can be interpreted as the probability of observing the state ω = ( so, s a) over the effective game length. Given the payoff associated with each state, the expected pay-off can be obtained by weighting each payoff with ¯σsosa .Accordingly, the expected payoffs for the offerer and the accepter are, respectively, given by 

πo(So, S a) = (1 − h) (¯ σHH + ¯ σHL ) + (1 − l)¯ σLL , (A4a) 

πa(So, S a) = h (¯ σHH + ¯ σHL ) + l¯σLL . (A4b) Furthermore, the fairness rate corresponding to the strat-egy pair (So, S a) can be computed from the weighted av-erage state vector as 

γ(So, S a) = ¯ σHH . (A5) The value of ¯σsosa is, of course, dependent on the strat-egy pair (So, S a), and the appropriate notation would be 

¯σsosa (So, S a). However, we retain ¯σsosa for notational convenience. 

> Appendix B: Long-term evolutionary dynamics in two-species population

The long-term evolutionary dynamics in a well-mixed, homogeneous population are typically described by the Imhof–Fudenberg–Nowak process [46, 47], and it pro-vides a tractable analytical framework for modelling mu-tation–selection dynamics under rare mutations. This process is widely used to characterize long-run behaviour in single-population settings. However, the long-term evolutionary dynamics in multi-species populations— specifically, in two-species settings—and an analytically tractable framework for its analysis remain, to the best of our knowledge, unreported in the literature. We here extend the Imhof–Fudenberg–Nowak process in two-population settings and present an analytical description of the long-term mutation–selection process in a two-species population consisting of offerers and accepters. In doing so, we consider a finite, well-mixed heteroge-neous population under a rare-mutation process, in which each mutation either fixes in the population or goes ex-tinct before another mutation occurs. Consequently, in either case, the population remains monomorphic at each time step and undergoes a sequence of transitions among population states over long evolutionary time scales. The scenario described above can be fully characterized analytically using a discrete-state, discrete-time Markov 10 chain. The states of the Markov chain correspond to the possible population states, each characterized by a pair of strategies adopted by the two subpopulations. There are 16 possible population states, since the strategy sets of the offerer and the accepter— So = {Fo, Ao, Co, Uo} and 

Sa = {Fa, Aa, Ca, Ua}, respectively—have four elements each. In the mutation–selection process of the heterogeneous population, different mutations in a given resident popu-lation can lead to the same population state in the next evolutionary time step. For example, the transition from the population state (Co, Ca) to (Fo, Ca) can occur due to the occurrence of four types of mutant pairs: (Fo, Ca),

(Fo, Aa), (Fo, Ua), and (Fo, Fa). In the first case, the mu-tation arises in only one subpopulation and must reach fixation. In contrast, in the latter three cases, mutations arise in both subpopulations, but only the mutant in the offerer population must invade in order to reach the final state (Fo, Ca).Thus, the transition probabilities between two monomorphic population states are determined by the fixation probabilities of the mutants that can lead to the same future population state from a given resident popu-lation state. We numerically compute these probabilities using the birth–death process in a heterogeneous pop-ulation (see Appendix C). It is important to note that mutants must appear in both subpopulations in order to generate transitions between population states such as from (So, S a) to ( ˜So, ˜Sa), with So̸ = ˜So and Sa̸ = ˜Sa. In this case, the transition probability is determined by the fixation probability of the mutant pair ( ˜So, ˜Sa).To express the transition probabilities mathe-matically, we denote the fixation probability by 

ρS′ 

> oS′
> a

(( So, S a), ( ˜So, ˜Sa)) for a mutant ( ˜So, ˜Sa) arising in the resident population state (So, S a), which re-sults in the future population state (S′

> o

, S ′

> a

) where 

S′ 

> o

∈ { So, ˜So} and S′ 

> a

∈ { Sa, ˜Sa}. As an illustration, 

ρ ˜SoSa (( So, S a), ( ˜So, ˜Sa)) denotes the probability that the mutant pair ( ˜So, ˜Sa) arising in the resident state (So, S a)

leads to transition from (So, S a) to ( ˜So, S a). In addition, we use μo and μa to represent the probability of mutation occurring in the offerer and the accepter subpopulations, respectively, at each time step. With all the required elements in place, we now pro-ceed to formulate the transition probabilities in order to construct the Markov chain transition matrix. There are three different types of transitions between the states: 

(So, S a) to ( ˜So, S a), (So, S a) to (So, ˜Sa) and (So, S a) to 

( ˜So, ˜Sa). Let us discuss them one by one: 

• The transition probability from the state (So, S a)

to the state ( ˜So, S a) can be written as 

r[( So, S a), ( ˜So, S a)] = μo(1 − μa)ρ ˜SoSa [( So, S a), ( ˜So, S a)] + μoμa

X 

> S′
> a̸=Sa
> Sa∈S a

ρ ˜SoSa [( So, S a), ( ˜So, S ′

> a

)] .

The first term represents the mutation process in which a mutation appears in the offerer subpopula-tion but does not arise in the accepter subpopula-tion; obviously, mutation compatible with this pro-cess occurs with probability μo(1 −μa). The second term represents the mutation process in which mu-tations appear in both subpopulations but fixation occurs only in the offerer subpopulation. The fac-tor μoμa represents the probability that mutations arise in both subpopulations. 

• In a similar manner, the expression of the transition probability for the transition (So, S a) to (So, ˜Sa)

can be written as 

r[( So, S a), (So, ˜Sa)] = (1 − μo)μaρSo ˜Sa [( So, S a), (So, ˜Sa)] + μoμa

X 

> S′
> o̸=So
> So∈S o

ρSo ˜Sa [( So, S a), (S′

> o

, ˜Sa)] .

• The transition from state (So, S a) to ( ˜So, ˜Sa) occurs only if mutations appear and fixate in both subpop-ulations. Therefore, the transition probability for this case is 

r[( So, S a), ( ˜So, ˜Sa)] = μoμaρ ˜So ˜Sa [( So, S a), ( ˜So, ˜Sa)] .

• Finally, the probability that no transition occurs between the population states can be expressed as 

r[( So, S a), (So, S a)] = 1 − r[( So, S a), ( ˜So, S a)] − r[( So, S a),

(So, ˜Sa)] − r[( So, S a), ( ˜So, ˜Sa)] .

These transition probabilities form the 16 dimensional Markov transition matrix, which we denote by R. Let 

α(t) denote the probability row vector at time t, whose component α(t)(So,S a) represents the abundance of the pop-ulation state (So, S a) at time t. This probability vec-tor is obtained using the Markov chain equation α(t) = 

α(0) Rt, given an initial probability vector α(0) . As we consider the initial state to be the unfair strategy pair 

(Uo, Ua), we assign 1 to the component of α(0) corre-sponding to the state (Uo, Ua) and 0 to other compo-nents. 

> Appendix C: Birth-death process in two-species population

In this section, we present the birth–death process in a heterogeneous population in order to determine the fix-ation probability—the probability with which a mutant replaces a resident population—required to formulate the Markov chain framework for stochastic long-term evolu-tionary dynamics. We, therefore, consider a well-mixed heterogeneous population consisting of two subpopula-tions: offerers and accepters, whose population sizes are 11 denoted by No and Na, respectively. We assume that each offerer can adopt one of two possible strategies, So

and ˜So, and each accepter can adopt one of the two avail-able strategies, Sa and ˜Sa. Furthermore, we assume that the strategic interaction between the offerer and the ac-cepter subpopulations is governed by the bimatrix game presented in Eq. (3). The state of the heterogeneous pop-ulation at any point in time is denoted by (no, n a), where 

no is the number of offerers with strategy ˜So in the of-ferer subpopulation and na is the number of accepters with strategy ˜Sa in the accepter subpopulation. A offerer accumulates an expected payoff by interact-ing with (Na − na) accepters with strategy Sa and na

accepters with strategy ˜Sa, whereas an accepter receives an expected payoff from interactions with (No − no) of-ferers with strategy So and no offerers with strategy ˜So.Therefore, the expected payoffs of an offerer with strate-gies So and ˜So can be written as 

ESo (na) = 1

Na

h

(Na − na)πo(So, S a) + naπo(So, ˜Sa)

i

,E ˜So (na) = 1

Na

h

(Na − na)πo( ˜So, S a) + naπo( ˜So, ˜Sa)

i

.

Likewise, the expected payoffs of an accepter with strate-gies Sa and ˜Sa are given by 

ESa (no) = 1

No

h

(No − no)πa(So, S a) + noπa( ˜So, S a)

i

,E ˜Sa (no) = 1

No

h

(No − no)πa(So, ˜Sa) + noπa( ˜So, ˜Sa)

i

.

We now define the fitness of a player as an exponential function [36, 43] of the expected payoff of that player. Therefore, the fitness of So and ˜So strategist offerers are 

fSo = ewE So and f ˜So = ewE ˜So ;

in a similar manner, the fitness of Sa and ˜Sa strategist accepters are given by, 

fSa = ewE Sa and f ˜Sa = ewE ˜Sa .

Here, w represents the intensity of selection, which can take values from zero to infinity. w → 0 represents the dominance of neutral drift. As w increases, the role of payoffs in fitness increases, and therefore selection be-comes stronger. We employ the birth–death process to govern the replication–selection dynamics of the strategies in the population, and numerically determine the fixation prob-abilities. At each time step, one individual from each subpopulation is selected for reproduction with proba-bility proportional to her fitness. Then, one individual from each subpopulation is randomly chosen to die. The offspring in each subpopulation subsequently replaces the individual that dies in the corresponding subpopulation. As a result, the population size in each subpopulation remains constant. The relative fitness of an offerer with the strategy So

and ˜So are respectively given by, 

prSo = (No − no)fSo

¯fo

and pr 

> ˜So

= nof ˜So

¯fo

,

where ¯fo = ( No − no)fSo + nof ˜So represents the average fitness of the offerer subpopulation. Similarly, the rela-tive fitness of an accepter with strategy Sa and ˜Sa can be respectively calculated as 

prSa = (Na − na)fSa

¯fa

and pr 

> ˜Sa

= naf ˜Sa

¯fa

,

where ¯fa = ( Na − na)fSa + naf ˜Sa represents the average fitness of the accepter subpopulation. The superscript 

r is used to represent the probability of a player being chosen for reproduction. Subsequently, we determine the probability that aplayer of a given type is chosen for death, which is equal to the frequency of that type in the population. Given the state of the population (no, n a), the probability that an offerer with strategy ˜So and an accepter with strategy 

˜Sa are selected for death are given by 

pd 

> ˜So

= no

No

and pd 

> ˜Sa

= na

Na

.

Clearly, the probabilities that an offerer with strategy So

and an accepter with strategy Sa are selected for death are pdSo = 1 −pd 

> ˜So

and pdSa = 1 −pd

> ˜Sa

. Here, the superscript 

d denotes the probability that a player is selected to die. These probabilities govern the stochastic short-term evo-lutionary dynamics of the strategies in the heterogeneous population. To numerically determine the fixation probabilities, we introduce one mutant in either or both subpopula-tions, depending on which fixation probability needs to be computed, and run the process for a sufficiently long time until the mutant either fixates or goes extinct. In the case where mutants arise in both subpopulations, we determine the fixation probabilities in the following way. Suppose mutants with strategy pair ( ˜So, ˜Sa) arise in a heterogeneous population with resident strategy pair 

(So, S a). As discussed earlier, this situation can gener-ate three distinct new population states: (No, 0) , (0 , N a),and (No, N a). Therefore, we examine which of these three states the population is absorbed into, starting from the initial distribution (no, n a) = (1 , 1) . Since the process is stochastic in nature, we repeat the process for multiple trials starting from the same initial distribution 

(no, n a) = (1 , 1) . We then record the frequency of trials in which the population is absorbed in (No, 0) , (0 , N a),and (No, N a) in order to determine the fixation prob-abilities ρ ˜SoSa [( So, S a), ( ˜So, ˜Sa)] , ρSo ˜Sa [( So, S a), ( ˜So, ˜Sa)] 

and ρ ˜So ˜Sa [( So, S a), ( ˜So, ˜Sa)] , respectively. In passing, we mention that an analytical expression for fixation proba-bilities in a two-species population exists in the literature, but it is valid only in the weak selection limit [43]. 12 The remaining two fixation probabilities 

ρ ˜SoSa [( So, S a), ( ˜So, S a)] and ρSo ˜Sa [( So, S a), (So, ˜Sa)] 

can be obtained by introducing the mutant in one sub-population. In such a case, the mutant gives rise to an unique final state upon fixation. For example, a mutant 

( ˜So, S a) in the resident population state (So, S a) can reach the final state ( ˜So, S a) upon fixation. Therefore, the fixation probability is the frequency of trials that are absorbed in the state (No, 0) starting from (1 , 0) .This situation is similar to the birth–death process in a homogeneous population [45], since the state of the subpopulation in which no mutation occurs remains unchanged over time. It allows us to use the analytical expression for the fixation probability in homogeneous population with appropriate modifications to find the fixation probability ρ ˜SoSa [( So, S a), ( ˜So, S a)] . Similarly, we find the fixation probability ρSo ˜Sa [( So, S a), (So, ˜Sa)] .

[1] C. Darwin, On the origin of species by means of natural selection: Or the preservation of the favoured races in the struggle for life. (John Murray, 1860). [2] M. Milinski, An evolutionarily stable feeding strategy in sticklebacks1, Zeitschrift für Tierpsychologie 51 , 36–40 (2010). [3] S. F. Brosnan and F. B. M. de Waal, Monkeys reject unequal pay, Nature 425 , 297–299 (2003). [4] S. F. Brosnan, H. C. Schiff, and F. B. M. de Waal, Tol-erance for inequity may increase with social closeness in chimpanzees, Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Bio-logical Sciences 272 , 253–258 (2005). [5] F. Range, L. Horn, Z. Viranyi, and L. Huber, The absence of reward induces inequity aversion in dogs, Proceed-ings of the National Academy of Sciences 106 , 340–345 (2009). [6] M. Bekoff, Wild justice and fair play: cooperation, for-giveness, and morality in animals, Biology & amp; Phi-losophy 19 , 489–520 (2004). [7] B. Heinrich, Mind of the Raven: Investigations and Ad-ventures with Wolf-Birds (HarperCollins, 2009). [8] S. F. Brosnan, Nonhuman species’ reactions to inequity and their implications for fairness, Social Justice Re-search 19 , 153–185 (2006). [9] E. Fehr and K. M. Schmidt, A theory of fairness, compe-tition, and cooperation, The Quarterly Journal of Eco-nomics 114 , 817 (1999). [10] E. Fehr and U. Fischbacher, The nature of human altru-ism, Nature 425 , 785–791 (2003). [11] J.-B. André and N. Baumard, Social opportunities and the evolution of fairness, Journal of Theoretical Biology 

289 , 128–135 (2011). [12] K. Binmore, Natural Justice (Oxford University Press, New York, 2005). [13] S. F. Brosnan and F. B. M. de Waal, Evolution of re-sponses to (un)fairness, Science 346 (2014). [14] S. Debove, N. Baumard, and J.-B. André, On the evo-lutionary origins of equity, PLOS ONE 12 , e0173636 (2017). [15] J. Maynard Smith and G. R. Price, The logic of animal conflict, Nature 246 , 15–18 (1973). [16] J. Maynard Smith, The theory of games and the evolution of animal conflicts, Journal of Theoretical Biology 47 ,209–221 (1974). [17] J. Maynard Smith, Did Darwin Get It Right? (Springer US, 1988) p. 202–215. [18] M. A. Nowak, K. M. Page, and K. Sigmund, Fair-ness versus reason in the ultimatum game, Science 289 ,1773–1775 (2000). [19] Z. Yang, Z. Li, T. Wu, and L. Wang, Effects of part-ner choice and role assignation in the spatial ultimatum game, EPL (Europhysics Letters) 109 , 40013 (2015). [20] J. Henrich, R. McElreath, A. Barr, J. Ensminger, C. Barrett, A. Bolyanatz, J. C. Cardenas, M. Gur-ven, E. Gwako, N. Henrich, C. Lesorogol, F. Marlowe, D. Tracer, and J. Ziker, Costly punishment across hu-man societies, Science 312 , 1767–1770 (2006). [21] X. Han, S. Cao, Z. Shen, B. Zhang, W.-X. Wang, R. Cressman, and H. E. Stanley, Emergence of communi-ties and diversity in social networks, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114 , 2887–2891 (2017). [22] J. Henrich, R. Boyd, S. Bowles, C. Camerer, E. Fehr, H. Gintis, R. McElreath, M. Alvard, A. Barr, J. Ens-minger, N. S. Henrich, K. Hill, F. Gil-White, M. Gurven, F. W. Marlowe, J. Q. Patton, and D. Tracer, “economic man” in cross-cultural perspective: Behavioral experi-ments in 15 small-scale societies, Behavioral and Brain Sciences 28 , 795–815 (2005). [23] K. Binmore and L. Samuelson, An economist’s perspec-tive on the evolution of norms, Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics (JITE) 150 , 45 (1994). [24] R. T. Croson, Information in ultimatum games: An ex-perimental study, Journal of Economic Behavior & Or-ganization 30 , 197–212 (1996). [25] C. Gaertig, A. Moser, S. Alguacil, and M. Ruz, Social information and economic decision-making in the ulti-matum game, Frontiers in Neuroscience 6 (2012). [26] W. Güth and M. G. Kocher, More than thirty years of ultimatum bargaining experiments: Motives, variations, and a survey of the recent literature, Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 108 , 396–409 (2014). [27] Y.-S. Chiang, A path toward fairness: Preferential asso-ciation and the evolution of strategies in the ultimatum game, Rationality and Society 20 , 173–201 (2008). [28] Y. Zhang, S. Yang, X. Chen, Y. Bai, and G. Xie, Repu-tation update of responders efficiently promotes the evo-lution of fairness in the ultimatum game, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 169 , 113218 (2023). [29] K. M. Page, M. A. Nowak, and K. Sigmund, The spa-tial ultimatum game, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences 267 , 2177–2182 (2000). [30] J. McKenzie Alexander, The Structural Evolution of Morality (Cambridge University Press, 2007). [31] T. Killingback and E. Studer, Spatial ultimatum games, collaborations and the evolution of fairness, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sci-ences 268 , 1797–1801 (2001). [32] T. Wu, F. Fu, Y. Zhang, and L. Wang, Adaptive role switching promotes fairness in networked ultimatum 13 

game, Scientific Reports 3 (2013). [33] X. Wang, X. Chen, and L. Wang, Random allocation of pies promotes the evolution of fairness in the ultimatum game, Scientific Reports 4 (2014). [34] Y. Zhang, X. Chen, A. Liu, and C. Sun, The effect of the stake size on the evolution of fairness, Applied Mathe-matics and Computation 321 , 641–653 (2018). [35] J. Gale, K. G. Binmore, and L. Samuelson, Learning to be imperfect: The ultimatum game, Games and Economic Behavior 8, 56–90 (1995). [36] D. G. Rand, C. E. Tarnita, H. Ohtsuki, and M. A. Nowak, Evolution of fairness in the one-shot anonymous ultima-tum game, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-ences 110 , 2581–2586 (2013). [37] K. Page, Empathy leads to fairness, Bulletin of Mathe-matical Biology 64 , 1101–1116 (2002). [38] I. Tamarit and A. Sánchez, Emotions and strategic be-haviour: The case of the ultimatum game, PLOS ONE 

11 , e0158733 (2016). [39] T. Slembeck, Reputations and Fairness in Bargaining -Experimental Evidence from a Repeated Ultimatum Game With Fixed Opponents , Experimental 9905002 (Univer-sity Library of Munich, Germany, 1999). [40] R. Axelrod and W. D. Hamilton, The evolution of coop-eration, Science 211 , 1390–1396 (1981). [41] M. Nowak and K. Sigmund, The evolution of stochastic strategies in the prisoner’s dilemma, Acta Applicandae Mathematicae 20 , 247–265 (1990). [42] R. Axelrod and W. D. Hamilton, The evolution of coop-eration, Science 211 , 1390–1396 (1981). [43] T. Sekiguchi and H. Ohtsuki, Fixation probabilities of strategies for bimatrix games in finite populations, Dy-namic Games and Applications 7, 93–111 (2015). [44] A. Traulsen, M. A. Nowak, and J. M. Pacheco, Stochastic dynamics of invasion and fixation, Physical Review E 74 

(2006). [45] M. A. Nowak, Evolutionary Dynamics: Exploring the Equations of Life (Harvard University Press, Cam-bridge., 2006). [46] D. Fudenberg and L. A. Imhof, Imitation processes with small mutations, Journal of Economic Theory 131 ,251–262 (2006). [47] L. A. Imhof and M. A. Nowak, Stochastic evolutionary dynamics of direct reciprocity, Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 277 , 463–468 (2009). [48] R. Cressman, The Stability Concept of Evolutionary Game Theory: A Dynamic Approach (Springer Berlin Heidelberg). [49] R. Cressman, Frequency-dependent stability for two-species interactions, Theoretical Population Biology 49 ,189–210 (1996). [50] R. Cressman and Y. Tao, The replicator equation and other game dynamics, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 , 10810–10817 (2014). [51] V. Kumar Dubey, S. Chakraborty, A. Patra, and S. Chakraborty, Evolutionarily stable strategy in asym-metric games: Dynamical and information-theoretical perspectives, Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 36 (2026). [52] P. D. Taylor and L. B. Jonker, Evolutionary stable strate-gies and game dynamics, Mathematical Biosciences 40 ,145–156 (1978). [53] P. Schuster, K. Sigmund, J. Hofbauer, R. Gottlieb, and P. Merz, Selfregulation of behaviour in animal societies: Iii. games between two populations with selfinteraction, Biological Cybernetics 40 , 17–25 (1981). [54] M. A. Nowak and K. Sigmund, The alternating prisoner’s dilemma, Journal of Theoretical Biology 168 , 219–226 (1994). [55] P. S. Park, M. A. Nowak, and C. Hilbe, Cooperation in alternating interactions with memory constraints, Nature Communications 13 (2022). [56] W. H. Press and F. J. Dyson, Iterated prisoner’s dilemma contains strategies that dominate any evolutionary oppo-nent, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 

109 , 10409–10413 (2012). [57] P. LaPorte, C. Hilbe, and M. A. Nowak, Adaptive dy-namics of memory-one strategies in the repeated dona-tion game, PLOS Computational Biology 19 , e1010987 (2023). [58] A. E. Roth and I. Erev, Learning in extensive-form games: Experimental data and simple dynamic models in the intermediate term, Games and Economic Behav-ior 8, 164–212 (1995). [59] M. Iosifescu and R. Theodorescu, On bush-mosteller stochastic models for learning, Journal of Mathematical Psychology 2, 196–203 (1965). [60] C. Camerer and T. Hua Ho, Experience-weighted attrac-tion learning in normal form games, Econometrica 67 ,827–874 (1999). [61] M. W. Macy and A. Flache, Learning dynamics in so-cial dilemmas, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 99 , 7229–7236 (2002). [62] A. Patra, S. Sengupta, A. Paul, and S. Chakraborty, Cor-rigendum: Inferring to cooperate: evolutionary games with bayesian inferential strategies (2024 new j. phys. 26 063003), New Journal of Physics 27 , 079501 (2025). [63] R. Selten, Reexamination of the perfectness concept for equilibrium points in extensive games, International Journal of Game Theory 4, 25–55 (1975). [64] C. Aliprantis and I. Topolyan, Trembling-hand myopia and trembling-hand perfection, Economics Letters 113 ,39–41 (2011). [65] K. Ito, J. M. McNamara, A. Yamauchi, and A. D. Hig-ginson, The evolution of cooperation by negotiation in a noisy world, Journal of Evolutionary Biology 30 , 603–615 (2017). [66] S. Chakraborty, I. Agarwal, and S. Chakraborty, Replicator-mutator dynamics of the rock-paper-scissors game: Learning through mistakes, Physical Review E 

109 (2024). [67] C. Hilbe, Simsa, K. Chatterjee, and M. A. Nowak, Evo-lution of cooperation in stochastic games, Nature 559 ,246–249 (2018).