Title: Mechanistic insights into the spatial organization of RNA polymerase proteins and the chromosome in E. coli cells

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.02838v1

Published Time: Mon, 06 Apr 2026 00:34:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# Mechanistic insights into the spatial organization of RNA polymerase proteins and the chromosome in E. coli cells. 

Debarshi Mitra 1 and Jens-Uwe Sommer 1,2,31 Leibniz Institute of Polymer Research Dresden, 01069 Dresden, Germany  

> 2

Institute for Theoretical Physics, TU Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany  

> 3

Cluster of Excellence Physics of Life, TU Dresden, 01307 Dresden, Germany 

Along the bacterial chromosome, regions called rrn operons contain genes that are transcribed into ribosomal RNA. These operons are among the most transcriptionally active sites in the genome. It has been observed in E. coli that RNA polymerase (RNAP), while binding to these genetic loci along the chromosome during transcription, forms dense clusters, leading to spatial colocalization of the operons within the cell. Recent experimental evidence suggests that liquid–liquid phase separation contributes to the formation of RNAP clusters, with the antitermination factor NusA playing a key role [1]. We present a simulation model to investigate the mechanisms underlying the formation of these biomolecular condensates. We propose that mutual attraction between NusA proteins, which exhibit a miscibility gap at higher concentrations, drives condensate formation via 

a polymer-assisted condensation pathway, and we demonstrate how these condensates promote the colocalization of rrn operons . Our results reconcile seemingly disparate experimental observations of chromosomal organization reported in fluorescence-based imaging and Hi-C experiments. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

In the last decade, biomolecular condensates have been at the forefront of biophysical research [2, 3]. These con-densates act as membraneless organelles inside cells and form via liquid–liquid phase separation (LLPS) [2, 4]. Biomolecular condensates are known to mediate a wide range of biological processes [5–8] and a variety of dis-eases have been linked to their aberrant formation or regulation [9–11]. In cells of higher order organisms, it is well established that the nucleolus is a membraneless organelle formed 

via LLPS [12–14] that acts as a site of ribosome syn-thesis. The nucleolus contains ribosomal RNA genes, nascent rRNA transcripts, RNA polymerase (hereafter referred to as RNAP), and numerous auxiliary proteins required for ribosome biogenesis [15]. By contrast, the role of biomolecular condensates in bacterial cells, and particularly their consequences for the organization of chromosomes, has remained largely elusive [16]. The organization of chromosomes in bacterial cells con-tinues to be a long-standing research problem. In the case of E. coli , the chromosome has a length of approx-imately ∼ 1 mm when fully stretched, yet it is confined within a cell of length ∼ 2 μm. To achieve this high level of compaction, the E. coli chromosome is organized and compacted at multiple length scales. Furthermore, the chromosome participates in replication and transcrip-tion, which rely on specific interactions between various proteins and chromosomal loci. Two complementary classes of experimental tech-niques: Hi-C [17] and fluorescence-labeling-based meth-ods such as FISH (Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization) [18–21], have been widely used to probe the spatial or-ganization of bacterial chromosomes. Hi-C experiments provide information about the ensemble-averaged likeli-hood that two genomic segments are in spatial proximity. FISH experiments on the other hand, provide informa-tion about the spatial positioning and dynamics of spe-cific tagged genomic loci. Together, these two comple-mentary approaches provide comprehensive insights into the static and dynamical aspects of chromosome organi-zation. The factors that drive genome organization are closely related to the cellular processes such as replication and transcription. Transcription is carried out by RNAPs, which binds to specific genetic loci along the chromo-some. Along the chromosome contour, there exist spe-cific loci known as rrn operons , which contain genes en-coding ribosomal RNA (rRNA). These rrn operons (all except one) have been observed to spatially colocalize in E. coli cells [22], largely independent of growth con-ditions. However, this colocalization is statistical in na-ture: if one considers any pair of rrn operons , the average spatial distance between them is smaller than expected for two genomic loci separated by a similar genomic dis-tance along the chromosome [22]. However, contact mea-surements obtained from Hi-C experiments indicate that there are no stable or long-lived contacts between distant genomic segments along the E. coli chromosomal contour [17]. Reconciling these two experimental observations: the colocalization of rrn operons in imaging experiments and the absence of persistent contacts in Hi-C maps, re-mains an open question. It has recently been established that RNAPs form dis-tinct clusters (condensates) inside E. coli cells [1, 23]. This is observed even for E. coli strains where five of the seven rrn operons have been artifically deleted [23]. The work of [1] further suggests that phase separation is driven by an anti-termination factor protein called NusA (hereafter called Nus). Nus binds to RNAP (which is bound to DNA) during transcription and helps in the ef-ficient transcription of the ribosomal RNA genes. The authors of [1] further showed that the Nus phase sepa-

> arXiv:2604.02838v1 [cond-mat.soft] 3 Apr 2026

2        

> Figure 1. Schematic illustration of the coarse-graining and our model: (a) Left: the rrn operon sequence (red strand) binds to RNAP (yellow) and ‘bound’ Nus proteins (blue); 10 of 42 (both Nus and RNAP) proteins are shown. Right: the operon is mapped onto an effective monomer in our model. RNAP acts as a linker connecting bound Nus proteins to the operon. The Nus proteins form a corona around the operon. (b) Sketch of the coarse-grained model of the chromosome inside the cylindrical E. coli cell. The free Nus proteins are shown in green display attractive interaction and are also attracted by the corona particles attached to the rrn operons .

rates in-vitro in the presence of a crowding agent, albeit at much higher concentrations than what is seen in-vivo .To visualize how the RNAPs and Nus are arranged in the cell during transcription, refer to the model schematic in Fig.1. The work of [24] established a key link between the clustering of RNAPs and transcription. They showed that the clustering of RNAPs diminish significantly when transcription is inhibited [24]. During transcription, a large fraction ( ≈ 30%) of RNAPs bind exclusively to the sites of rrn operons , which are among the most tran-scriptionally active sites in the chromosome [25]. This indicates that the binding of RNAPs to genetic sites (and especially to the sites of rrn operons ) plays a key role in inducing the clustering of Nus and RNAPs in the cell. As mentioned before, it was shown in Ref.[1] that Nus only phase separates in-vitro at concentrations much higher than what is present in vivo . It is still worth asking if phase separation can occur in vivo due to the binding of Nus to RNAPs, which in turn are bound to genetic sites during transcription. In this context, previous work [26] has demonstrated that proteins that interact weakly with a long flexible polymer, such as a chromatin, can undergo phase separation even when the bulk protein so-lution lies outside its miscibility gap. This mechanism, termed Polymer Assisted Condensation (PAC), arises be-cause weak attractive interactions between proteins and the polymer lead to an enrichment of proteins in the vicinity of the polymer. As a result, the local protein concentration near the polymer can become significantly higher than in the surrounding bulk solution. When this local concentration exceeds the threshold for phase sep-aration, a condensate nucleates on the polymer. Thus, the polymer effectively acts as a scaffold that promotes condensation. Motivated by this mechanism, we propose that Nus proteins may drive condensate formation in vivo 

in E. coli , due to their association with RNAPs which are in turn bound to rrn operons .In this work, we propose a generic physical model where we show that the formation of Nus condensates in E. coli leads to the subsequent colocalization of rrn operons due to the coarsening of the condensates. In our framework, weak interactions among the Nus proteins drive condensation through a PAC-like mechanism. Fi-nally, we also provide a possible explanation for why rrn operon colocalization is observed in fluoroscence-based imaging experiments but not in Hi-C contact maps. In the subsequent section of the manuscript, we first describe our simulation model. There we outline all the interactions between the chromosome-polymer and the proteins. Then we describe results from our simulations in the ‘Results’ section. We finally conclude with a ‘Dis-cussions’ of obtained results. 3      

> Figure 2. Bulk phase diagram of the Nus: We dis-play the bulk phase diagram of free Nus in the absence of the chromosome-polymer and bound Nus. The yellow region denotes the parameter regime where phase separation occurs, and the violet region corresponds to the homogeneous phase. The red circle ( ϵn/kBT = 2 .5 and ρnus = 0 .29 μM) corre-sponds to the bulk state which we select for our simulations.
> II. SIMULATION MODEL

Our model comprises of 4 components: the chromo-some polymer, the RNAP beads, the bound Nus beads and free Nus beads. In this section, we detail the various interactions among these components in our model. In our simulations we apply a Monte Carlo algorithm which is described further below 

The chromosome: We use a bead spring model of a flexible ring polymer with 460 monomers representing the 

E. coli chromosome inside a cylindrical cell. Two neigh-boring monomers along the chain contour interact via the harmonic spring potential with energy VH = κ(r − a)2,where r is the distance between the monomers. The unit of length in our study is a = 1, being the equilibrium length of the harmonic-springs between two neighbour-ing monomers. The spring constant κ is 100 k BT/a2.The interactions between monomers are modeled by a Lennard-Jones (LJ) potential of the form 

VLJ (ϵ, σ, r c) = 4 ϵ[( σ/r )12 − (σ/r )6 − (σ/r c)12 − (σ/r c)6](1) We consider the chromosome in good solvent and there-fore implementing only repulsive, excluded volume (EV) interactions: ϵ = 2 .5 k BT, σ = 0 .8a and rc = 2 1/6σ [27]. The E. coli chromosome has 4 .6 Mbp of DNA, thus each monomer corresponds to 10 kbp of DNA. We choose this degree of coarse-graining which corresponds to topo-logically distinct domains due to the presence of super-coiled loops [28]. Furthermore, in this study we are specifically interested in the spatial colocalization of rrn operons which are genetic sites spanning ∼ 5.5 kbp of DNA which coincides with the degree of coarse-graining. Note that the Kuhn length of bare ds-DNA is known to be comprised of 300 base pairs (bp) [29]. Thus, each monomer in our simulations corresponds to a length scale much greater than the Kuhn length and the polymer can be considered as fully flexible. 

Sites of rrn operons : Seven monomers along the polymer chain correspond to the seven sites of rrn operons in E. coli . If the coarse-grained monomer having index 1 is considered to be the ori (origin of replication), then the sites of rrn operons correspond to the monomers: 1, 3, 12 , 25 , 29 , 121 and 371. The monomer indices of the rrn operons can be calculated based on the ‘genomic addresses’ of the sites of rrn operons along the contour [22]. 

Cylindrical confinement: Each coarse-grained monomer (of diameter 0 .8a) in our simulations com-prises of 10 kbp of DNA which represent topological domains formed by supercoiled loops which are further compacted by proteins. These domains may roughly have a size of ≈ 120 nm [30–32]. Thus, the unit of length in our simulations a, is given by a ≈ 150 nm. Since, the 

E. coli cell has a diameter of 1 μm, the diameter of the cell in our simulation is 7 a. The length of the cylinder is chosen to be 17 .5a. The aspect ratio of 1 : 2 .5 of the cylinder corresponds to the one observed in-vivo for an E. coli cell in slow growth conditions with a single mother chromosome [33]. To simulate impenetrable cell walls we reject any Monte Carlo trial move in which the center of the monomer or a protein attempts to occupy a position located outside the cylinder. 

RNAP proteins: Proteins are considered as single beads on our level of coarse-graining. It is known that approximately 2000 RNAPs are present in the E. coli 

cell (corresponding to slow growth conditions) in vivo 

and 50% of these RNAPs ( ≈ 1000) are actively involved in transcription [34]. Out of these actively transcribing RNAPs, 30% of molecules bind to sites of rrn operons 

[25]. Therefore, we consider 294 RNAPs such that each 

rrn operon site is bound to 42 RNAPs. These RNAPs are bound to the sites of rrn operons by a harmonic interaction potential Vrnap = κr (r − ar )2, where r is the distance between a RNAP and a particular rrn operon 

site. The equilibrium length of the harmonic-spring between the RNAP and the rrn operon monomer is given by ar = σr /2 + σ/ 2. The spring constant κr

is 100 k BT/a2. The quantity σr denotes the size of a RNAP and is given by σr = 0 .1a. This corresponds to a size of 15nm which roughly corresponds to the characteristic size of protein molecules [29]. We do not consider the excluded volume of the RNAPs as in reality RNAPs are fixed and distributed along the rrn operon 4                    

> Figure 3. Simulation snapshots and probability dis-tribution of distance between neighbouring Nus: (a) Snapshots (radial and the longitudinal view) from our sim-ulations are displayed corresponding to ϵn= 2 .5 k BT and
> Nf= 400. The chromosome monomers are shown in red and monomers corresponding to the rrn operons are shown in green (enlarged). Bound Nus beads are shown in blue and free Nus shown in cyan (enlarged). In (b) we display the proba-bility distribution of the distance between between a free Nus bead and its nearest free Nus neighbour. We display the dis-tributions for ϵn= 2 .5 k BT, ϵn= 2 .0 k BT and when there are purely repulsive interactions between the Nus. The dis-tribution has been computed with data collected after every 10 ,000 MCS, from 1 ×10 6MCS to 7 .5×10 6MCS.

sequence. Therefore, the RNAP proteins are unlikely to interact with each other. In our model the RNAP play the role of linker elements between the coarse-grained operon and the bound Nus proteins, see Fig.1. 

Nus proteins: Every RNAP binds one Nus, thus have Nbound = 294 ‘bound’ Nus in the cell. Each Nus bead is bound to a RNAP by a harmonic interaction potential Vnus = κn(r − an)2, where r is the distance between a Nus bead and a particular RNAP. The equilibrium length of the harmonic-spring between the RNAP and Nus is given by an = σr /2 + σn/2. The spring constant κn is 100 k BT/a2. The quantity σn

denotes the size of Nus and is given by σn = 0.1a.The bound Nus particles form a corona around the coarse-grain operon monomer, as sketched in Fig.1. In addition, we consider a number ( Nf ) of ‘free’ Nus which are not bound to RNAPs. 

Interaction model of Nus: The free Nus beads in-teract with each other via attractive Lennard Jones (LJ) interactions given by VLJ (ϵ, σ, r c) where ϵ = ϵf , σ = σn

and rc = 2 .5σn, see Eq.1. The free Nus beads also in-teract with the bound Nus beads via attractive LJ inter-actions given by VLJ (ϵ, σ, r c) where ϵ = ϵbf , σ = σn and 

rc = 2 .5σn.We choose equal interaction strengths between all Nus proteins, ϵbf = ϵf = ϵn. We deliberately choose Nf =400 (corresponding to ρnus = 0 .29 μM) and ϵn = 2 .5 k BT, to ensure that the system is outside the miscibility gap, see Fig.2. The ‘bound’ Nus beads interact with each other only 

via the repulsive interaction given by VLJ (ϵ, σ, r c) where 

ϵ = ϵn, σ = σn and rc = 2 1/6σn. This is because in our coarse-grained model there are 42 ‘bound’ Nus beads in close proximity to a single coarse-grained rrn operon 

monomer. In reality, they are bound to different parts along the contour of the rrn operon sequence in the same way as RNAP and are thus unlikely to interact directly with each other. This is a consequence of our coarse-grained approach: on the one hand, each operon is represented as a single bead; on the other hand, we aim to capture the high effective functionality of operon regions arising from the large number of bound Nus proteins. 

Monte Carlo Algorithm: We apply a Monte Carlo dynamics in continuous space [27, 35] . In total there are N beads in the simulation box (monomers, RNAPs and Nus). A Monte Carlo step (MCS) involves N at-tempts to displace a bead in a random direction, with the maximum magnitude of the displacement in each di-rection being 0 .1a. When attempting a displacement, the bead is chosen at random from N beads. The at-tempt is accepted if the Metropolis criterion is fulfilled thus ensuring convergence to the canonical distribution and detailed balance. We first initialize the positions of the polymer monomers, the Nus beads, and the RNAP beads inside the cylindrical confinement. The system is then evolved using Monte-Carlo simulations. To eliminate any initial spatial overlaps, we first simulate the system using a soft repulsive potential. The strength of the repulsive inter-action is gradually increased from zero in discrete steps until it reaches its final value. In the simulations this is achieved by gradually increasing the value of σ and σn.We then estimate the time required for conformational relaxation of the polymer. To this end, we define a vector connecting two monomers separated by half the contour length of the ring, namely monomers 1 and 230. We com-pute the autocorrelation of the corresponding unit vector and observe that the correlation decays to zero in approx-imately 1 × 10 6 Monte-Carlo steps (MCS). This indicates that the polymer has equilibrated by 1 ×10 6 MCS. There-after, we implement the binding of RNAP molecules to the rrn -operon monomers, ensuring that each operon is bound to 42 RNAPs. We then implement the binding of Nus beads to the RNAP molecules and ensure that 5each RNAP is bound to one Nus bead. After the binding of RNAPs and Nus, we switch on the attractive interac-tions between the Nus. We collect data only after the attractive interactions have been switched on.  

> III. RESULTS

Miscibility gap of Nus: As mentioned in the intro-duction, Nus has been shown to phase separate in vitro at higher concentrations. Therefore, we first conduct sim-ulations where there is only free Nus inside the cylinder in the absence of the chromosome polymer and RNAPs. We do this to identify the parameter regime in which Nus display a miscibility gap in our simulations. The results are shown in Fig.2. We vary both the concentration of Nus, ρnus , as well as ϵn to construct the bulk phase diagram. The yellow region in Fig.2 corresponds to the parameter regime where the system exhibits phase separation. In the violet region of the phase diagram, the system is in a homogeneous state. In Fig.2 we highlight a point in red which corresponds to the value of ρnus and ϵn

that we use in our subsequent simulations. We have additionally checked that the addition of the chro-mosome polymer without attractive sites (bound Nus) does not change the phase behavior for the selected state. 

Formation of condensates by PAC-like mecha-nism: We now establish that even outside the miscibil-ity gap of free Nus, the system exhibits phase separation in the presence of the chromosome-polymer with bound Nus for ϵn = 2 .5 k BT and Nf = 400 (corresponding to 

ρnus = 0 .29 μM, see red circle in Fig.2 ). Nus condensates are formed in close proximity to the sites of rrn operons .The high number of interacting sites (bound Nus) form a corona around the operon which acts as a (chemical) potential trap for the free Nus, see Fig.1 for illustration. As a result the concentration of the free Nus proteins is increased. When the local concentration exceeds the threshold for phase separation, a condensate nucleates in proximity to the sites of rrn operons . This mechanism is similar to the PAC mechanism proposed in Ref.[26]. Thus, the binding of Nus to RNAPs which are in turn bound to rrn operons is crucial to induce phase separa-tion. As these condensates coarsen with time, distant 

rrn operon sites are brought into proximity and become a part of the condensate. In Fig.3a we display a sim-ulation snapshot of a case where condensate formation has occurred. The monomers corresponding to the rrn operons are shown in green. These monomers have been enlarged for aid of visualization. The bound Nus are shown in blue and have been enlarged for aid of visual-ization, RNAPs are not shown. In Fig.3b we display the probability distribution of the distance between a free Nus and its nearest neighbour. When ϵn = 2 .5 k BT, a bimodal distribution with two separated peaks is seen, which indicates that two phases have been formed.                          

> Figure 4. Number of Nus particles in cluster and spatial distribution of components: In (a) we display the probability distribution of the number of free Nus particles in the largest cluster ( Ncluster ), formed during a simulation run. We display data for ϵn= 2 .5 k BT and for the case when there are only repulsive interactions among Nus. In (b) we display the radial probability densities p(r) of the various components as a function of the distance rfrom the center of mass (COM) of the cluster. The quantity p(r)·4πr 2dr gives the probability of finding a particle in a spherical shell between rand r+dr .The radial bin size used in the calculation is δr = 15 nm. The distributions shown in (a) and (b) have been computed with data collected after every 10 ,000 MCS from 1 ×10 6MCS to 7.5×10 6MCS.

When the strength of the attractive interactions (ϵn) is reduced significantly below 2 .5 k BT then phase separation no longer occurs and the distribution is single peaked such as shown for for ϵn = 2 k BT. In Fig.3b, we also display the case where there are only repulsive in-teractions between the Nus beads for comparison. From these results we can conclude that the mean distance between non-condensed free Nus is about 110 nm. 

Spatial distribution of components inside the condensate: In Fig.4a we display the probability distri-bution of the number of free Nus particles in the largest cluster ( Ncluster ), formed during a simulation run. We display data for ϵn = 2 .5 k BT and for the case when there are only repulsive interactions among Nus. To compute the number of free Nus particles in the largest cluster, 6we first used a distance-based connectivity analysis to identify all the members of the largest cluster. We aim to identify all the free and bound Nus particles as well as the rrn operon monomers which may be a part of the cluster. For each simulation frame (collected after every 10 4 MCS), pairwise distances between the particles were computed, and two particles were considered connected if their separation was smaller than a prescribed cutoff distance of 75 nm. We use a cutoff distance of size of the operons (having a radius of 60 nm) which are a part of the cluster. Also, the chosen cutoff distance is still con-siderably lower than the distance between neighbouring Nus particles in the dilute phase which is approximately 110 nm, as displayed in Fig.3b. Clusters were then identi-fied using an iterative procedure: starting from an unas-signed particle, all neighboring particles within the cutoff were recursively added, followed by neighbors of those neighbors, until no further particles could be included. After all members of the largest cluster were identified, the number of free Nus particles in the cluster, Ncluster ,was calculated. In Fig.4a we display the distribution of Ncluster for two values of the interaction parameters between Nus. With-out attractive interactions only small clusters are statis-tically formed which corresponds to the non-condensed phase. For the case of attractive interactions the largest cluster corresponds to a condensed state which incorpo-rates several hundreds of Nus-particles. In Fig.4b we display the radial probability densities 

p(r) of the various components as a function of the distance r from the center of mass (COM) of the largest cluster. It can be inferred from Fig.4b that the 

rrn operons occupy the periphery of the cluster with higher likelihood, while the free and bound Nus are preferentially found closer to the center of the cluster, but have broad distributions. 

Dynamics of Nus in the two phases: We now in-vestigate the dynamics of the free Nus inside the conden-sate. We emphasize that the condensates are dynamic in the sense that the dilute and the condensed phases exchange components (free Nus beads) frequently. A rel-evant question to ask is: what is the mean residence time of the free Nus bead inside the cluster? To that end, we calculate the probability distribution of a free Nus bead to be in the cluster for time τ measured in MCS, refer Fig.5a. To calculate the residence time we calculate how how long a free Nus bead remains continu-ously within the largest cluster over successive simulation frames. Therefore, in Fig.5a we display the probability distribution of a free Nus bead to be a part of the clus-ter for time τ . We further fit an exponential function given by P(0) · exp( −τ /τ r ) to the curve. The quantity 

τr is the mean residence time of a free Nus bead to be inside the cluster. We find that τr ≃ 11 , 000 MCS which is much shorter than the length of a typical simulation run ( ≈ 1 × 10 7 MCS). Thus, free Nus dynamically diffuse in and out of the condensate during the simulation run.            

> Figure 5. Dynamics of Nus in the two phases: In (a) we display the probability distribution of free Nus to be inside the condensate for time τ(MCS). The mean residence time τr, is extracted by fitting an exponential function: P(0) ·exp( −τ /τ r)to the curve. The mean residence time is τr≃11 ,000 MCS. In (b) we display the distributions of diffusion constants of free Nus in the dilute and the dense phase respectively. The most probable diffusion constant value in the two phases differ by approximately two orders of magnitude

To further establish a correspondence with experi-ments in Ref.[1], we calculate the mean square displace-ment (MSD) of free Nus as a function of time (MCS). The diffusion constant for free Nus in the dense state, was esti-mated during the time interval in which a free Nus bead resides within the largest cluster. We record the posi-tions of free Nus particles, every 100 MCS. Continuous residence durations were then determined by identifying sequences of consecutive frames in which the bead re-mained in the largest cluster. For each residence episode longer than one frame, we first identify the frame where the particle is part of the cluster for the first time. This corresponds to time t = t1. We then identify the last frame where the particle is part of the cluster. This corresponds to time t = t2. The squared displacement over this interval given by ∆ r2 = ( r(t2) − r(t1)) 2 was computed. The diffusion constant was then obtained as 

D = ∆ r2/6∆ t where ∆ t = t2 −t1. This analysis was then repeated for different residence episodes for the same Nus bead. We do this for all the Nus particles that are ever 7                        

> Figure 6. Colocalization of rrn operons :In (a) we display the probability distribution of the pairwise distance between
> rrn operons for ϵn= 2 .5 k BT and for only repulsive interactions between Nus, computed over 1 ×10 5to 7 .5×10 6MCS. In (b) we display the contact map of the chromosome-polymer, which has been computed by averaging from 1 ×10 6MCS to 4 ×10 6
> MCS with data collected after every 10 ,000 MCS. The monomers having indices 3 and 12 show high contact probabilities. In (c) we display the contact map at later times, averaging from 5 ×10 6MCS to 7 .5×10 6MCS. The monomers having indices 3, 12 and 121 show high contact probabilities.

part of the largest cluster during the entire simulation run. Thus, the diffusion constants obtained can then be used to calculate the probability distribution displayed in Fig.5b. Similarly the diffusion constant of the free Nus in the dilute phase, can be estimated during the duration in which a free Nus bead resides outside the cluster. Thus, the probability distribution of diffusion constants of Nus in the dilute phase as shown in Fig.5b was obtained. We note that the most probable diffusion constant value in the two phases differ by approximately two orders of magnitude. This is similar to what was reported in Ref.[1]. Note that the distribution of the dense phase in Fig.5b is broader than the distribution of the dilute phase. This is because in the dense phase, there are some free Nus beads which are found close to the surface of the cluster. These beads are then part of the cluster for a short times before they diffuse into the dilute phase. The dynamics of these beads in those short durations are then relatively unaffected by the dense environment in the interior of the condensate. Therefore, these beads have a diffusion coefficient similar to what is seen in the bulk phase. 

Colocalization of rrn operons and contact maps: 

In Ref. [22] the authors showed that any pair of rrn oper-ons are statistically closer to each other, than any other two genomic segments separated by equivalent genomic distance, i.e. rrn operons are colocalised. To reconcile the experimental observations using our model, we display the probability distribution of the pairwise distance be-tween rrn operons in Fig.6a. It is seen that when the sys-tem shows phase separation and condensates are formed for ϵn = 2 .5 k BT, the probability distribution of the pair-wise distances between rrn operons shows a pronounced peak at small values corresponding to the distance be-tween those rrn operon pairs that get spatially colocal-ized. The second maximum coincides approximately with the peak of the distribution of non-condensed rrn oper-ons . Not all operons get spatially colocalized in a single cluster during a simulation run. This causes a multi-modal distribution where the additional maxima indicate the spatial separation of the different clusters. In Fig.6b we display the contact map of the chromosome-polymer. If the distance between any two monomers is less than 210 nm then the monomers are deemed to be in contact. For any two monomers having indices i and j, the color of the contact map at the coordinate (i,j) indicates the probability of contact of monomers i and j. The bright diagonal that can be seen in the contact map arises from contacts of monomers with their adjacent neighbours along the contour. Bright spots away from the diagonal correspond to the sites of 

rrn operons which come into contact as the condensate gets formed. In Fig.6b, it is seen that the rrn operon 

monomers having indices 3 and 12 are in contact. The contact map shown in Fig.6b has been computed by averaging from 1 × 10 6 MCS to 4 × 10 6 MCS. At later times, as the clusters coarsen, other rrn operon 

monomers come into contact. In Fig.6c we display the contact map corresponding to later times, which has been computed by averaging from 5 × 10 6 MCS to 7.5 × 10 6 MCS. It is seen that the monomers 3 and 12 have continued to be in contact. In addition, the rrn operon monomer having index 121 forms contacts with monomers 3 and 12. It may be expected that at long times all the sites of rrn operons would be spatially colocalized since the entropy effort to form additional loops scales with the logarithm of the loop length and is thus of order kBT and coalescence of the individual clusters is a very slow process 

The role of active noise during transcription: In Fig.6 we showed that due to the formation of conden-sates, the sites of rrn operon come into contact. These 8                                      

> Figure 7. Results for the model where noisy interactions ( ϵn) among Nus are considered: In (a) we display the time series of ϵnas a function of MCS. For the given choice of parameters, ϵnremains strictly below 3 k BT. In (b) we display the corresponding contact map by averaging from 9 ×10 6MCS to 12 .4×10 6MCS. The monomers 1,3, 25 and 29 show high contact probabilities. In (c) we display another contact map which has been computed by averaging over a longer period of time, from 1 ×10 4MCS to 12 .5×10 6MCS. Bright points get significantly faded as compared to (b). In (d) we display the distribution of the pariwise distance between rrn operons , computed over 1 ×10 4MCS to 12 .5×10 6MCS. In (e) we display the probability distribution of the time duration τo(measured in MCS) over which any pair of rrn operons remain colocalized as a function of τo. We find by fitting an exponential function, that the typical timescale ( τR) over which they remain colocalized is 30 ,000 MCS. This distribution was obtained by collecting data from 1 ×10 4MCS to 12 .5×10 6MCS, and from 5 independent realizations of the system.

contacts are long-lived which supports the experimen-tal observations in Ref. [22]. However, this seems to be in contradiction to what the experimentally obtained Hi-C maps suggest [17]. The Hi-C data does not show indications of long-lived contacts of distant genomic seg-ments. To resolve this potential contradiction, we ex-tend our model. So far we have considered that bound Nus are permanently attached to the RNAP proteins, which in turn are permanently bound to the sites of rrn operons . However, in reality RNAPs frequently disasso-ciate from chromosomal segments even as transcription occurs [29, 36] at the timescale of 1 − 100s. In our coarse-grained model this means that bound Nus particles leave the corona, see Fig.1, and other can be attached to newly bound RNAPs. Since it is the multivalent interaction of the many bound Nus in the corona which is responsi-ble for the condensation we instead model this process by considering fluctuations in the strength of the attrac-tive interactions among Nus, i.e. we introduce temporal fluctuations to the strength of the LJ interactions ( ϵn)among the Nus beads given by a time-dependent value as: 

ϵn = ϵ0 + r(t). The quantity ϵ0 = 2 .0 k BT indicates the mean LJ interaction strength and r(t) is a normally dis-tributed random number with zero mean and variance of 0.01. We select ϵ0 such that the strength of the LJ inter-action is weak enough, and the system is outside the bulk miscibility gap at all times. We find that the conden-sates form transiently and consequently the sites of rrn operons transiently colocalize and then diffusively drift apart. This is established in the data presented in Fig.7. In Fig.7a we show that the quantity ϵn(t) changes after every 50 , 000 MCS and fluctuates around ϵ0 = 2 k BT. At all times ϵn remains less than 3 k BT and therefore the system is outside the bulk miscibility gap at all times. 

Mapping the simulation time to experimental time scales: The data for the diffusion behavior, see Fig.5b, can be used to obtain a mapping from MCS to real time units (seconds). We note that the peak of the diffusion constant distribution in the dilute phase in Fig.5b corresponds to ≈ Ddilute = 10 −3 a2/MCS. In the 9work of [1] the most probable diffusion constant in the dilute phase was found to be ≈ 1 μm2/s, refer Fig. 4(f) in [1]. Using this result we arrive at 1s ≈ 4 × 10 4 MCS, or vice versa, 10 6 MCS correspond to 25 s. Thus, the fluctuations in ϵn which occur every 50 , 000 MCS corre-sponds to ≈ 1 s in real time. This roughly corresponds to the typical residence times of RNAPs on DNA during transcription [36]. 

Potential reconciliation of experimental results: 

In Fig.7b we again display a contact map which has been computed by averaging over a period from 9 × 10 6 MCS to 12 .4 × 10 6 MCS. It is seen that monomers 1, 3, 25 and 29 are in contact. In Fig.7c we display another contact map which has been computed by averaging over a larger duration, from 1 × 10 4 MCS to 12 .5 × 10 6 MCS. When the contact map is computed over long times, the bright spots get significantly faded. A run of 12 .5 × 10 6 MCS corresponds to about 5 minutes in real time. The typical cell cycle of an E. coli cell occurs over 20 − 40 minutes [29]. We posit that over such time scales the bright spots would get completely ‘averaged out’. In Fig.7d we display the distribution of the the pairwise distances between the 

rrn operons . Despite the transient colocalisation of rrn operons , the distribution is still peaked at relatively short distances, which indicates stitistical colocalization of rrn operons . Thus, our model involving noisy interaction due to active transcription reconciles the experimentally ob-tained results from both Hi-C experiments as well as the results obtained using fluorescence imaging experiments [22]. Finally, in Fig.7e we display the probability distri-bution of τo, which is the duration (in MCS) over which any two rrn operons remain spatially colocalized. We find by fitting an exponential function that the typical timescale over which any two rrn operons remain colo-calized is given by τR ∼ 3 × 10 4 MCS which corresponds to ≈ 1 s in real time units. Thus, Hi-C experiments which rely on ensemble-averaged measurements of cells in different stages of their life cycles, are unlikely to show signatures of rrn operon colocalization. In a Hi-C experiment, cells are first treated with formaldehyde, which effectively cross-links DNA seg-ments that are close to each other, typically through proteins bound to the DNA [37]. The DNA is then cut into small fragments, but fragments that were cross-linked by proteins remain held together. Next, the enzyme DNA ligase chemically joins the ends of these nearby fragments, producing DNA molecules that represent pairs of loci that were close in 3D space. The cross-links are then removed and DNA is purified, leaving only the ligated fragments. Finally, these fragments are sequenced, generating a genome-wide map of contacts that reflects how often two regions of DNA come into near contact, mediated directly or indirectly by proteins or protein clusters. The cross-linking by formaldehyde occurs over 10 minutes. In our work we show that the rrn operons remain colocalized for ≈ 1 s, so the cross-linking process which occurs over 10 minutes is unlikely to lead to cross-links between the rrn operons . We posit that this could also be an additional reason why Hi-C experi-ments do not show signatures of rrn operon colocaliztion.  

> IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

In this work, we establish a model by which Nus-proteins form clusters even outside the bulk miscibility gap via a PAC-like mechanism, which can explain the colocalization of rrn operons observed in recent exper-iments. We propose a coarse-grained model in which topologically distinct domains of the bacterial DNA on the order of 10 kbp are mapped onto effective beads, re-sulting in a cyclic flexible polymer of 460 repeat units confined within a cylinder representing the E. coli cell. The rrn operons are represented by special beads to which Nus proteins are bound via RNAP proteins. In essence, the operon units display a corona of Nus pro-teins that act as highly functional interaction sites with respect to freely diffusing Nus proteins in the cytoplasm. We show that this scenario leads to phase separation of free Nus together with the Nus-decorated rrn operons ,thus explaining the experimentally observed colocaliza-tion of rrn operons .Further evidence for the formation of a dense Nus-phase comes from experiments measuring the diffusion dynamics of Nus. In addition to bound Nus, two dif-fusive populations have been identified, corresponding to slow diffusion (in an apparently denser environment) and normal diffusion in the cytoplasm. Our simple polymer-physics-based model reproduces this behavior as a conse-quence of the partitioning of Nus into a condensed phase and a dilute phase. By comparing the free diffusion co-efficient with experimental values, we map the Monte Carlo step onto a realistic time scale; according to this mapping, our simulations extend over about 5 minutes of real time. A puzzling aspect is that colocalization of rrn operons 

cannot be observed in Hi-C maps. A possible explanation is the presence of active processes that lead to rapid re-organization dynamics of operon clusters on time scales comparable to those of Hi-C sample preparation, such that contacts arising from operon clustering, when aver-aged over many cells and cell generations, do not yield a persistent signal. In simple terms, rrn operon clusters are dynamic, and different groups of operons associate over time. By contrast, in our model only coarsening of condensates is observed on time scales comparable to the preparation time of Hi-C samples. However, the simple model abstracts from reality by neglecting active pro-cesses during transcription of the rrn operons , which in-troduce a finite residence time for RNAP at the operon. To incorporate an essential feature of these active (non-thermal) fluctuations into our model, we introduce an interaction parameter between Nus proteins that fluctu-ates on a time scale of about 1 s, comparable to the typi-cal attachment/detachment time of RNAP. This actively 10 driven interaction enhances cluster dynamics and sup-presses further coarsening at long times. Averaging the contact map over longer time periods—corresponding to sampling many cells—leads to a fading of cluster-specific signals, while spatial correlations still reveal colocaliza-tion of rrn operons .In conclusion, we show that phase separation of Nus proteins assisted by Nus-decorated rrn operons can ra-tionalize various, partly seemingly contradictory, experi-mental observations in a semi-quantitative manner. An interesting question is to what extent the colocalization of rrn operons supports efficient ribosome production in bacterial cells. Drawing an analogy to eukaryotic cells, where the ribosome “factory” is the complex multiphase nucleolar condensate, one may speculate that Nus clus-ters play a similar role or at least form part of an anal-ogous scaffold in bacteria. In this context, our model still lacks the aspect of rRNA extrusion and subsequent biochemical processing of ribosomal components. In par-ticular, the constant flux of nascent rRNA from operon sites may influence condensate properties and, in partic-ular, limit coarsening, similar to our ad hoc approach of fluctuating interactions among Nus proteins. Such effects could be incorporated into the Monte Carlo algorithm and will be considered in future work. 

V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungs-gemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) through the Research Training Group GRK 3120. J.U.S acknowledges support by the DFG under the grant SO 277/25 and by Germany’s Excellence Strategy-EXC2068-390729961-Cluster of Excellence Physics of Life. 

VI. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS 

J.U.S.: Conceptualization, model development, writ-ing D.M.: Model development, simulations, data anal-ysis, visualization, validation, writing. All authors con-tributed to discussion and approved the final manuscript. 

[1] Anne-Marie Ladouceur, Baljyot Singh Parmar, Stefan Biedzinski, James Wall, S. Graydon Tope, David Cohn, Albright Kim, Nicolas Soubry, Rodrigo Reyes-Lamothe, and Stephanie C. Weber. Clusters of bacterial RNA polymerase are biomolecular condensates that assemble through liquid–liquid phase separation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 117(31):18540–18549, July 2020. [2] Anthony A. Hyman, Christoph A. Weber, and Frank J¨ ulicher. Liquid-liquid phase separation in biology. 

Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology ,30(1):39–58, October 2014. [3] Yongdae Shin and Clifford P. Brangwynne. Liquid phase condensation in cell physiology and disease. Science ,357(6357), September 2017. [4] Dilimulati Aierken, Sebastian Aland, Stefano Bo, Steven Boeynaems, Danfeng Cai, Serena Carra, Lindsay B. Case, Hue Sun Chan, Jorge R. Espinosa, Trevor K. GrandPre, Alexander Y. Grosberg, Ivar S. Haugerud, William M. Jacobs, Jerelle A. Joseph, Frank J¨ ulicher, Kurt Kremer, Guido Kusters, Liedewij Laan, Keren Lasker, Katrin S. Laxhuber, Hyun O. Lee, Kathy F. Liu, Dimple Notani, Yicheng Qiang, Paul Robustelli, Leonor Saiz, Omar A. Saleh, Helmut Schiessel, Jeremy Schmit, Meng Shen, Krishna Shrinivas, Antonia Statt, Andres R. Tejedor, Tatjana Trcek, Christoph A. We-ber, Stephanie C. Weber, Ned S. Wingreen, Huaiying Zhang, Yaojun Zhang, Huan Xiang Zhou, and David Zwicker. Roadmap for condensates in cell biology, 2026. arXiv:2601.03677. [5] Clifford P. Brangwynne, Christian R. Eckmann, David S. Courson, Agata Rybarska, Carsten Hoege, J¨ obin Gharakhani, Frank J¨ ulicher, and Anthony A. Hyman. Germline P granules are liquid droplets that local-ize by controlled dissolution/condensation. Science ,324(5935):1729–1732, June 2009. [6] Marina Feric, Nilesh Vaidya, Tyler S. Harmon, Diana M. Mitrea, Lian Zhu, Tiffany M. Richardson, Richard W. Kriwacki, Rohit V. Pappu, and Clifford P. Brangwynne. Coexisting liquid phases underlie nucleolar subcompart-ments. Cell , 165(7):1686–1697, June 2016. [7] Amy R. Strom, Alexander V. Emelyanov, Mustafa Mir, Dmitry V. Fyodorov, Xavier Darzacq, and Gary H. Karpen. Phase separation drives heterochromatin do-main formation. Nature , 547(7662):241–245, June 2017. [8] Sukanta Mukherjee, Enrico Skoruppa, Holger Merlitz, Jens-Uwe Sommer, and Helmut Schiessel. A self-organized liquid reaction container for cellular memory. 

Advanced Science , January 2026. [9] Nina Ripin and Roy Parker. Formation, function, and pathology of RNP granules. Cell , 186(22):4737–4756, Oc-tober 2023. [10] Simon Alberti and Dorothee Dormann. Liquid–liquid phase separation in disease. Annual Review of Genetics ,53(1):171–194, December 2019. [11] Guoming Gao, Emily S. Sumrall, Sethuramasundaram Pitchiaya, Markus Bitzer, Simon Alberti, and Nils G. Walter. Biomolecular condensates in kidney physiology and disease. Nature Reviews Nephrology , 19(12):756–770, September 2023. [12] Mitsuhiro Yoneda, Takeya Nakagawa, Naoko Hattori, and Takashi Ito. The nucleolus from a liquid droplet per-spective. The Journal of Biochemistry , 170(2):153–162, 08 2021. [13] Christina M Caragine, Shannon C Haley, and Alexan-dra Zidovska. Nucleolar dynamics and interactions with nucleoplasm in living cells. eLife , 8:e47533, nov 2019. [14] Denis L. J. Lafontaine, Joshua A. Riback, R¨ umeyza Bascetin, and Clifford P. Brangwynne. The nucleolus as a multiphase liquid condensate. Nature Reviews Molecular 11 

Cell Biology , 22(3):165–182, September 2020. [15] Tyler S. Harmon, Diana M. Mitrea, Richard Kriwacki, and Frank Julicher. Converting stochastic assembly into an assembly line: Non-equilibrium droplet dy-namics assist ribosome formation. Biophysical Journal ,118(3):370a, February 2020. [16] Lydia Hodgins, Baljyot Singh Parmar, Rodrigo Reyes-Lamothe, and Stephanie C. Weber. Size matters: Abiophysical perspective on biomolecular condensates in bacteria. Annual Review of Biophysics , December 2025. [17] Virginia S. Lioy, Axel Cournac, Martial Marbouty, St´ ephane Duigou, Julien Mozziconacci, Olivier Esp´ eli, Fr´ ed´ eric Boccard, and Romain Koszul. Multiscale struc-turing of the E. coli chromosome by nucleoid-associated and condensin proteins. Cell , 172(4):771–783.e18, Febru-ary 2018. [18] Julie A. Cass, Nathan J. Kuwada, Beth Traxler, and Paul A. Wiggins. Escherichia coli chromosomal loci seg-regate from midcell with universal dynamics. Biophysical Journal , 110(12):2597–2609, 2016. [19] P. H. Viollier, M. Thanbichler, P. T. McGrath, L. West, M. Meewan, H. H. McAdams, and L. Shapiro. Rapid and sequential movement of individual chromosomal loci to specific subcellular locations during bacterial DNA repli-cation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,101(25):9257–9262, June 2004. [20] Sarah M. Mangiameli, Julie A. Cass, Houra Merrikh, and Paul A. Wiggins. The bacterial replisome has factory-like localization. Current Genetics , 64(5):1029–1036, April 2018. [21] B. Youngren, H. J. Nielsen, S. Jun, and S. Austin. The multifork Escherichia coli chromosome is a self-duplicating and self-segregating thermodynamic ring polymer. Genes & Development , 28(1):71–84, January 2014. [22] Tamas Gaal, Benjamin P. Bratton, Patricia Sanchez-Vazquez, Alexander Sliwicki, Kristine Sliwicki, Andrew Vegel, Rachel Pannu, and Richard L. Gourse. Colocal-ization of distant chromosomal loci in space in E. coli: a bacterial nucleolus. Genes & Development , 30(20):2272– 2285, October 2016. [23] Jun Fan, Hafez El Sayyed, Oliver J Pambos, Mathew Stracy, Jingwen Kyropoulos, and Achillefs N Kapanidis. RNA polymerase redistribution supports growth in E. coli strains with a minimal number of rRNA operons. 

Nucleic Acids Research , 51(15):8085–8101, 06 2023. [24] Xiaoli Weng, Christopher H. Bohrer, Kelsey Bettridge, Arvin Cesar Lagda, Cedric Cagliero, Ding Jun Jin, and Jie Xiao. Spatial organization of RNA polymerase and its relationship with transcription in Escherichia coli. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,116(40):20115–20123, September 2019. [25] Hans Bremer and Patrick P. Dennis. Modulation of chem-ical composition and other parameters of the cell at differ-ent exponential growth rates. EcoSal Plus , 3(1), January 2008. [26] Jens-Uwe Sommer, Holger Merlitz, and Helmut Schiessel. Polymer-assisted condensation: A mechanism for hetero-chromatin formation and epigenetic memory. Macro-molecules , 55(11):4841–4851, May 2022. [27] David P. Landau and Kurt Binder. A Guide to Monte Carlo Simulations in Statistical Physics . Cambridge Uni-versity Press, November 2014. [28] Lisa Postow, Christine D. Hardy, Javier Arsuaga, and Nicholas R. Cozzarelli. Topological domain structure of the Escherichia coli chromosome. Genes & Development ,18(14):1766–1779, July 2004. [29] Rob Phillips, Jane Kondev, Julie Theriot, Hernan G. Garcia, and Nigel Orme. Physical Biology of the Cell .Garland Science, October 2012. [30] Bae-Yeun Ha and Youngkyun Jung. Polymers under confinement: single polymers, how they interact, and as model chromosomes. Soft Matter , 11(12):2333–2352, 2015. [31] James Pelletier, Ken Halvorsen, Bae-Yeun Ha, Raffaella Paparcone, Steven J. Sandler, Conrad L. Woldringh, Wesley P. Wong, and Suckjoon Jun. Physical manipu-lation of the Escherichia coli chromosome reveals its soft nature. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,109(40), September 2012. [32] Chanil Jeon, Youngkyun Jung, and Bae-Yeun Ha. Aring-polymer model shows how macromolecular crowd-ing controls chromosome-arm organization in Escherichia coli. Scientific Reports , 7(1), September 2017. [33] F J Trueba and C L Woldringh. Changes in cell diameter during the division cycle of Escherichia coli. Journal of Bacteriology , 142(3):869–878, 1980. [34] Somenath Bakshi, Albert Siryaporn, Mark Goulian, and James C. Weisshaar. Superresolution imaging of ribo-somes and RNA polymerase in live Escherichia coli cells. 

Molecular Microbiology , 85(1):21–38, May 2012. [35] K. Binder and W. Paul. Monte carlo simulations of poly-mer dynamics: Recent advances. Journal of Polymer Science Part B: Polymer Physics , 35(1):1–31, 1997. [36] Zeliha Kilic, Ioannis Sgouralis, and Steve Press´ e. Resi-dence time analysis of RNA polymerase transcription dy-namics: A bayesian sticky hmm approach. Biophysical Journal , 120(9):1665–1679, May 2021. [37] Erez Lieberman-Aiden, Nynke L. van Berkum, Louise Williams, Maxim Imakaev, Tobias Ragoczy, Agnes Telling, Ido Amit, Bryan R. Lajoie, Peter J. Sabo, Michael O. Dorschner, Richard Sandstrom, Bradley Bernstein, M. A. Bender, Mark Groudine, Andreas Gnirke, John Stamatoyannopoulos, Leonid A. Mirny, Eric S. Lander, and Job Dekker. Comprehensive map-ping of long-range interactions reveals folding principles of the human genome. Science , 326(5950):289–293, Oc-tober 2009.